A major gunbattle also erupted in central Baghdad as a convoy of Iraqi soldiers moved from the Green Zone, a high security area that houses the Iraqi government and the US embassy, towards one of the main bridges crossing the Tigris river.
The group of Al-Qaeda's frontman in Iraq Abu Musab al-Zarqawi claimed responsibility Saturday for a suicide attack at an Iraqi polling station and vowed to spill more blood on election day, according to a statement posted on an Islamist website.
Insurgents attacked a police patrol at Salman Pak, just south of Baghdad, on Saturday killing two security forces, police said.
The bullet-riddled bodies of six Iraqi soldiers were found Friday in the western city of Ramadi, where two more people were killed and eight wounded in fighting between Iraqi forces and insurgents.
A suicide car bomber killed five people Saturday in an attack on a political party's offices in the Iraqi town of Khanaqin near the border with Iran, police said.
Insurgents set off a car bomb and attacked polling stations and security forces in several Iraqi cities Friday, killing at least six people as Iraqi exiles across the globe began voting in their country's landmark election.
Four people were killed in a suicide car bomb attack at a power station in the southern Baghdad neighbourhood of Dura, while an Iraqi soldier and a policeman were killed in separate attacks in Samarra and Kirkuk
The Iraqi authorities have ordered tough security measures, including a curfew, sealing off the borders and the closure of Baghdad international airport from Saturday.
One man was wounded in an attack on another polling station at Al-Dur and another civilian was injured in a mortar attack on a voting centre in Tikrit, Saddam Hussein's hometown.
A suicide bomber wearing an explosives belt walked up to an Iraqi polling station on Saturday and set off a blast that killed a child and seven adults, including three soldiers, said police and the US military.
Insurgents attacked a police patrol at Salman Pak, just south of Baghdad, on Saturday killing two security forces, police said.
Five US soldiers and at least eight Iraqis were killed Friday in a string of attacks, two days before Iraq's landmark elections which insurgents have vowed to drench in blood.
The Iraqi authorities have ordered tough security measures, including a curfew, sealing off the borders and the closure of Baghdad international airport from Saturday.
US forces clashed with insurgents in the Sunni stronghold town of Ramadi, west of Baghdad, and one civilian was killed, a hospital doctor said.
Gunmen killed a policeman in an attack in Musayyib, south of Baghdad, and a roadside bomb killed a police officer in Baiji.
Militants have promised an all-out onslaught against the election, but US President George W. Bush has urged Iraqis to brave death threats and seize what he termed an "historic opportunity" to vote in Iraq on Sunday.
But an Iraqi soldier was killed and another wounded when their patrol vehicle ran over a mine near Samarra, in the "Sunni Triangle" north of Baghdad, police said.
Gunmen opened fire on a polling station in the Jamia district of western Baghdad wounding one woman, police said.
Iraqi police and the US military said that a suicide bomber wearing an explosives belt walked up to an Iraqi polling station in Khanaqin, a town near the border with Iran, and set off a blast that killed eight people, including a child and three soldiers.
An Iraqi soldier was killed and another wounded when their patrol vehicle went over a mine near Samarra, in the Sunni Triangle north of Baghdad, police said.
One man was wounded in an attack on another polling station at Al-Dur and another civilian was injured in a mortar attack on a voting centre in Tikrit, Saddam Hussein's hometown.
Meanwhile, Iraqi exiles registered at three centres, in Sydney, Melbourne and the remote community of Shepparton in Victoria state on Friday and started casting their ballots.
Insurgents set off a car bomb and attacked voting stations and security forces in several Iraqi cities Friday, killing at least six people as campaigning for the election wrapped up and voters began casting their ballots abroad.
Earlier Friday, four people were killed in a suicide car bomb attack at a power station in the southern Baghdad neighbourhood of Dura, police and medical sources said.
The stunning strike came despite a massive nationwide security clampdown, complete with Iraqi army tanks rumbling through the capital for the first time since the fall of Saddam Hussein.
In the deadliest attack on Thursday, a car bomb hit an Iraqi army patrol near a polling station in Samarra, a mainly Sunni Muslim city.
In the countdown to the election, the Iraqi security forces bore the brunt of the attacks.
In Baghdad, hundreds of young men showed up near the Convention Center for $200-a-day jobs guarding polling stations.
Four women and four children were also wounded by mortar fire Thursday night, said Doctor Alaa al-Rawi of the city's hospital.
Iraqi troops traded fire with the Sunni Muslim insurgents Friday, in a gunfight in which a soldier and a civilian were killed, Lieutenant Colonel Mahmud Mohammed said.
Several guerrilla groups, including a faction led by Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, have declared war on the poll, vowing to kill anyone who votes.
"A lion from the martyrdom-seeking brigade of the Al-Qaeda Group of Jihad in the Land of Two Rivers carried out an attack against the Americans and their agents in the Khanaqin region," said the statement, whose authenticity could not be verified.
Four people were killed in a suicide car bomb attack at a power station in the southern Baghdad neighbourhood of Dura, police and medical sources said.
In Samara, 120 kilometres (75 miles) north of Baghdad, a soldier and a policeman were killed in clashes with insurgents, police said.
"The suicide bomber's car was packed with explosives when he drove into the headquarters of the Turkmen of Iraq Front," said Colonel Mahmoud Abdallah of the town's police.
Many Sunni clerics and politicians are vowing to boycott the vote, viewing it as another step in their minority community's marginalization.
Many embassy workers are housed in nearby prefabricated trailers protected by blast walls and sandbags; the trailers remain vulnerable to mortar and rocket attacks.
This was the seventh conversation that Bush has had with Iraqi leaders since the beginning of 2003.
Gunmen opened fire on a polling station in the Jamia district of western Baghdad wounding one woman, police said.
One policeman was shot dead in an attack on a polling station Saturday in Moqdadiya, 105 kilometers (65 miles) north of Baghdad.
At least 30 people were killed in Iraq as insurgents intensified attacks on Iraqi and US targets, and election workers backed by troops started distributing ballot boxes for the vote in just two days' time.
More than 14 million Iraqis are eligible to vote, but turnout is unpredictable amid the violence that has swept across large swaths of Iraq and amid the deep fissures among the nation's three major groups -- Shiite Muslims, Sunni Muslims and ethnic Kurds.
Hours before Iraqis headed to the polls for a momentous vote, a rocket struck the U.S. Embassy compound Saturday inside the heavily fortified Green Zone, killing two people and shattering the relative calm of election eve in the capital.
This tense capital, its streets devoid of most civilian traffic but bristling with edgy U.S. soldiers and Iraqi forces wearing black ski masks, was oddly quiet through most of Saturday.
Elsewhere in the country, several bombings and attacks on polling places marred the day before elections.
Authorities expect the violence to worsen Sunday, when voters will be particularly vulnerable as they venture to some of the more than 5,200 polling places.
However, insurgents, including Al-Qaeda frontman Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, have vowed to wreck the country's first democratic vote in decades and there are fears the violence will pursue right through the election weekend and beyond.
Another two soldiers were killed and three wounded Friday in two separate incidents in the capital, bringing to 1,412 the total number of US servicemen who died in Iraqi since the invasion almost two years ago.
Anxious troops wary of suicide car bombers trained weapons on the few vehicles that were on Baghdad's usually gridlocked streets, ordering many drivers to halt and submit to searches.
In the Shiite holy city of Najaf, Iraqi police, US troops and Iraqi security forces sealed off an area within a one-kilometer perimeter around a school to be used as a polling station when ballot papers were brought in.
Insurgents killed at least 19 Iraqis and bombed polling stations on Thursday in a fierce campaign to wreck Sunday's general elections.
South of Baghdad, in the so-called triangle of death, a homemade bomb killed five Iraqis and wounded 15 on the road between Mahmudiyah and Latifiyah.
As part of that campaign, insurgents have escalated their attacks on polling stations.
The attack was one of a series by insurgents in which at least 18 people were killed on the eve of Iraq's historic election despite massive security measures across the country.
There was only a driver inside the car, his face was masked," a policeman who witnessed the attack told AFP.
With some 40 polling stations already destroyed by insurgent attack, even the distribution of ballot boxes for Iraq's estimated 14.1 million eligible voters underscored the tension hanging over the poll.
The rocket attack marked a rare direct hit for insurgents, who frequently target the sprawling embassy complex but have never before killed anyone inside.
According to a U.S. statement, the rocket struck a building connected to the embassy's annex in Saddam's former Republican Palace.
A car bomb attack went off near a school to be used as a polling station in the same Baghad neighbourhood where the power station was targeted.
Repeated reports circulated that insurgents had stolen police trucks or ambulances and were planning to launch suicide attacks from those vehicles.
South of Baghdad, in the so-called triangle of death, a homemade bomb killed five Iraqis and injured 15 on the road between Mahmudiyah and Latifiyah.
A car bomb attack went off near a school to be used as a polling station in the same Baghad neighbourhood where the power station was targeted.
US and Iraqi forces fought insurgents in Baghdad and a heavy bursts of gunfire erupted in the centre of the capital as a convoy of Iraqi soldiers moved from the Green Zone, the high security area that houses the Iraqi government and the US and British embassies.
On Thursday, with some 40 polling stations already destroyed by insurgent attack, even the distribution of ballot boxes for Iraq's estimated 14.1 million eligible voters underscored the tension hanging over the poll.
Amid the relentless violence, the electoral commission pressed on with its mission in the closing hours of the campaign.
During his weekly radio address Saturday, President Bush hailed Iraqi voters, who he said were ``standing firm'' despite threats.
The US president said the vote offered an "historic opportunity" for Iraqis to start building a truly democratic society after decades of brutal dictatorship.
Sunday's election has been marred not only by growing violence but also by a boycott by many Sunni politicians concerned that the election will cede power to the long-oppressed Shiite majority.
``In the face of assassination, brutal violence and calculated intimidation, Iraqis continue to prepare for the elections and to campaign for their candidates.''
There was only a driver inside the car, his face was masked," a policeman who witnessed the attack told AFP.
"I think you will see on Election Day that most of the security is being provided by the Iraqis and the Iraqi forces," said State Department spokesman Richard Boucher.
But the kind of large-scale insurgent offensive that some had feared did not materialize.
His remarks were aired shortly before the embassy was struck.
A child and four adults were killed in the early morning attack in Khanaqin, which lies about 120 kilometers (100 miles) northeast of Baghdad, close to the frontier with Iran.
shouted Ali al-Kabeer, clapping his hands after casting his ballot in Dubai and breaking into tears as he hugged his wife who also voted.
Times staff writers Alissa J. Rubin in Baghdad and Tom Hamburger in Washington and special correspondents in Samarra, Basra, Kirkuk and Baghdad contributed to this report.
``So far, things are going ahead of schedule,'' said a cautious Valenzuela, flanked by bodyguards in Baghdad's cavernous convention center.
The blast killed the child, the three soldiers and four of the workers and wounded seven more workers, the sources said.
Ballot boxes were distributed to 5,300-odd polling centres across the country, along with millions of ballot papers and tens of thousands of bottles of indelible ink which voters will be tagged with to avoid fraud.
Despite Bush's confidence in the election, Turkish Prime Minister Tayyip Erdogan said on Thursday that the election would not be fully democratic since one major ethnic group is to be absent.
Ballot boxes were distributed to 5,300-odd polling centres across the country, along with millions of ballot papers and tens of thousands of bottles of indelible ink which voters will be tagged with to avoid fraud.
The bomber killed eight people near a police station after detonating an explosives-laden vest.
Sunday's election has been marred not only by growing violence but also by a boycott by many Sunni politicians concerned that the election will cede power to the long-oppressed Shiite majority.
Lieutenant Colonel James Hutton said that three soldiers were killed and another wounded in the explosion of a makeshift bomb in a western district of Baghdad.
US military commanders and Iraqi officials predict that violence will flare up as insurgents attempt spectacular new attacks.
Three small bomb blasts occurred at polling stations in Iraq's southern city of Basra on Thursday, but no one was hurt, according to a British army spokesman.
``It's all because of the bad security, violence and terrorist attacks recently,'' he said.
Sporadic bursts of gunfire resounded through the darkened streets.
The US military said Iraqi forces fought off an attack on a power station in southwestern Mosul on Friday night, killing one insurgent.
An OH-58 Kiowa Warrior, a reconaissance chopper from the same Baghdad-based division, crashed in a southwestern district of the capital, but there was no word on the fate of the two-man crew.
Sunnis have dominated Iraq for decades but have lost power to rival Shiite and Kurdish groups in the new order following the U.S.-led toppling of Saddam, himself a Sunni.
American forces were deployed across the city.
At least 60 people have been killed in a spate of attacks across the country over the past two days alone, in additon to the killing of 31 US military personnel in a helicopter crash in western Iraq on Wednesday.
"Yes, we did it!"
``Nobody resigned.''
But they have also warned that the insurgent violence will pursue right through the election weekend and beyond.
In one deadly attack Thursday, a car driven by a suicide bomber rammed an Iraqi army patrol in Samarra, a mainly Sunni Arab city north of Baghdad where US and Iraqi forces launched a massive operation last October to wrest control from insurgents before the vote.
Bush said the vote offered an "historic opportunity" for Iraqis to start building a truly democratic society after decades of brutal dictatorship.
Mohammad Jobouri, head of the electoral commission in largely Sunni Salahuddin province, predicted that only 10 percent of voters would turn out in Tikrit, Saddam's birthplace.
Seven Iraqis were killed and five others wounded, police said.
The Baghdad embassy, one of the largest U.S. missions in the world, is said to be home to some 3,000 employees, including a huge security contingent along with diplomats, representatives of assorted U.S. agencies and Iraqi staff.
Mortars struck two schools in the city, homemade bombs damaged two others, and gunmen sprayed a fifth with bullets and rocket-propelled grenades.
Dozens of voting stations have been attacked by insurgents who have put up posters and handed out leaflets warning Iraqis not to vote.
``Maybe it's a new start for my career.''
In Baquba, north of the capital, a car bomb attack on a provincial government headquarters killed five people while the bodies of four executed Iraqi soldiers were found in the city of Ramadi.
It was not clear precisely where the rocket hit.
While US forces worked to quell the insurgency, the US State Department has asserted that Iraqis will take "paramount" responsibility in providing security for the election.
The attack was one of a series by insurgents in which at least 18 people were killed on the eve of Iraq's US-backed election despite massive security measures across the country.
The facility sits behind two cordons of concrete blast walls and a series of security barriers, checkpoints and body searches -- all testament to its presence in one of the world's most hostile environments for U.S. personnel.
"At around 9:00 am (0600 GMT), a black GMC approached the checkpoint at the entrance of the power plant.
After nightfall, military trucks rolled through Baghdad's streets shining high-power spotlights and warning residents on loudspeakers to stay indoors during the new curfew hours and heed the government's ban on driving.
The militant group Army of Ansar al-Sunna issued a "final warning," saying anyone who votes would be marked for death, either during or after the election.
"At around 9:00 am (0600 GMT), a black GMC approached the checkpoint at the entrance of the power plant.
In Washington, top Democratic Senator Edward Kennedy called for a withdrawl of at least 12,000 US troops after Sunday's poll with a goal of a complete pull out next year.
With the election only three days away, violence has been escalating.
Insurgents, believed to be mostly Sunni Arabs, have vowed to kill anyone who votes.
US soldiers also discovered three makeshift bombs in Baghdad Friday.
In southern Basra, U.S. and Iraqi troops sealed off borders with neighboring countries, padlocking gates leading to Iran, blocking roads to Kuwait and closing the Um Qasir sea port leading to the Persian Gulf.
"It was a Sudanese member of Al-Qaeda," Molla Bakhtiar, a member of the party's political bureau, told reporters.
We lost three comrades and one civilian was also killed in the blast," said the policeman.
But election preparations were not as smooth in other parts of the country, particularly in Iraq's Sunni Arab heartland to the north and west of the capital.
Russia, a major player in the arena of world politics, said on Thursday that it would not send observers to monitor the election due to the security situation there.
A US helicopter also crashed in the Baghdad area, two days after the crash of a transport helicopter left 31 US troops dead, inflicting on the US military its heaviest loss in a single incident since the March 2003 invasion.
As well as the suicide bomber, the US military said an insurgent was killed trying to attack a power station.
``Tomorrow's elections will happen because of their courage and determination,'' Bush said.
"This is a historic opportunity for the people of Iraq to vote for a government," Bush said in an interview with Arabic televison station Al-Arabiya.
Dozens of voting stations have been attacked by insurgents who have put up posters and handed out leaflets warning Iraqis not to vote.
In the past two months, 22 members of Allawi's party were killed, according to party official Imad Shbib.
At one major intersection, an Iraqi armed personnel carrier incongruously offered free rides to children.
Four other polling stations in Baiji faced bomb attacks on Saturday and two on Friday night in Shorgat.
The US military said Iraqi forces fought off an attack on a power station in the northern city of Mosul on Friday night, killing one insurgent.
In the Shiite holy city of Najaf south of the capital, police, US and Iraqi forces sealed off a one kilometre (0.6 mile) perimeter around a school being used as a polling station as ballot papers were taken in.
Four soldiers and two civilians were also wounded.
Throughout Iraq, people vowed not to be intimidated.
The pair were acting on recommendations from retired US General Gary Luck, who was sent to Iraq by the Pentagon last month to look at the failings of Iraq's security force.
With about 40 polling stations destroyed by insurgents, even the distribution of ballot boxes for Iraq's 13 million eligible voters, about half of the country's population, underscored the grim security situation.
An official from the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK) in the Kurdish town of Suleimaniyah said the attacker had been identified as a Sudanese member of Zarqawi's network.
Four polling stations in Baiji faced bomb attacks on Saturday and two on Friday night in Shorgat.
The pair were acting on recommendations from retired US General Gary Luck, who was sent to Iraq by the Pentagon last month to look at the failings of Iraq's security force.
It is our destiny.''
Meanwhile, US President Bush and interim Iraqi President Ghazi al-Yawar on Thursday discussed efforts to get Iraqis to vote despite growing violence.
"I'm doing this for my children ... it's the first step in a thousand-mile journey."
"At this time, we have no evidence of hostile fire playing a role in the helicopter going down," Colonel Keith Walker said in a statement.
Insurgents, including Al-Qaeda frontman Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, have vowed to wreck the country's first democratic vote in decades.
In Sulimaniyah, an official with the Kurdistan Patriotic Union said the attacker had been identified as a Sudanese member of Iraq's most wanted man Abu Musab al-Zarqawi's network.
Eight soldiers and three civilians were killed, police said.
"This is a historic opportunity for the people of Iraq to vote for a government," Bush said in an interview with Arabic televison station Al-Arabiya.
We lost three comrades and one civilian was also killed in the blast," said the policeman.
"Those who don't pay heed will have only themselves to blame," the group said in a statement on the Internet.
Kirkuk has a divided population of Kurds, Arabs, Turkmans and other smaller minorities and has seen mounting violence this week.
He was speaking from Baghdad's Yarmuk hospital, where medical sources at the emergency department confirmed the death toll and added that three others policemen and a civilian were also wounded in the attack.
``I think we'll see millions of people across Iraq vote tomorrow,'' said Lt. Gen. Thomas F. Metz, operational chief for the more than 150,000 coalition troops here.
It was the latest in a series of finds of bodies of apparently executed security personnel in the city.
Insurgents have stepped up attacks on political parties, security forces and civilians in the run-up to Sunday's election, the first since the fall of former president Saddam Hussein almost two years ago.
"It was a Sudanese member of Al-Qaeda," Molla Bakhtiar, a member of the party's political bureau, told reporters.
The rocket attack that struck the embassy compound occurred shortly before 8 p.m., triggering a wail of sirens from the Green Zone, a sealed-off swath of central Baghdad that is home to Western diplomats, contract workers, U.S. troops and others.
Outside the capital, a suicide attack earlier in the day in the small Kurdish town of Khanaqin, near the Iranian border, heightened fears that insurgents may try to infiltrate polling stations with bombs or suicide belts.
In London, The Guardian newspaper reported US Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld and his British counterpart Geoff Hoon have agreed on a so-called exit-strategy based on doubling the number of Iraqi police trainees and setting up Iraqi paramilitary units.
A roadside bomb killed a U.S. soldier in western Baghdad, authorities reported.
Supporters of Iraq's most wanted man, Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, on Thursday posted a video on the Internet of their murder of a candidate in Iraq's elections from the party of US-backed interim Prime Minister Iyad Allawi.
The commander, speaking on condition of anonymity, said 400 Iraqi civilians, officials and security officers had been killed as part of a campaign of intimidation ahead of Sunday's election, the officer said.
He was speaking from Baghdad's Yarmuk hospital, where medical sources at the emergency department confirmed the death toll and added that three other policemen and a civilian were also wounded in the attack.
They will be the targets of the mujahedeen (Islamist fighters)," Ansar al-Sunna said in a website statement.
In Baquba, 60 km northeast of the capital Baghdad, a suicide car bomb hit the headquarters of a provincial government, killing five people.
An Iraqi policeman was killed and two civilians wounded in a host of attacks on buildings to be used as voting stations around Kirkuk, 250 kilometers (150 miles) north of the capital.
In London, The Guardian newspaper reported US Defence Secretary Donald Rumsfeld and his British counterpart Geoff Hoon have agreed on a so-called exit-strategy based on doubling the number of Iraqi police trainees and setting up Iraqi paramilitary units.
It is possible that no one will vote in the restive city of Samarra, he added.
An Iraqi policeman was killed and two civilians wounded in a host of attacks on buildings to be used as voting stations around Kirkuk, 250 kilometers (150 miles) north of the capital.
One US Marine was killed in action and four others wounded while conducting security and stability operations in Babil Province, according to the US military.
They will be the targets of the mujahedeen (Islamist fighters)," Ansar al-Sunna said in a website statement.
Neither US nor Iraqi authorities could confirm the statement.
"We have warned you not to go to the centres of this sordid comedy, called voting bureaus ... we renew our warning.
Insurgents have stepped up attacks on political parties, security forces and civilians in the run-up to Sunday's election, the first since the fall of former president Saddam Hussein almost two years ago.
The US military said at least one insurgent was also killed.
Four hundred Iraqis have been killed so far this month and dozens of voting stations attacked across Iraq on Friday, a senior US military officer said Saturday.
The Al-Qaeda Group in the Land of Two Rivers announced Sunday on a website that it had executed Salem Jaafar al-Kanani, "secretary of the traitor Iyad Allawi", and a video would be released at a later time.
The US military's top commander in Iraq, General George Casey, told AFP that the more Iraqi security forces come on line, the less visible America's 150,000 troops will be.
In and around the city of Kirkuk in the north, seven election centers were attacked with small-arms fire or mortars, according to Lt. Col. Yadgar Mohammed, operations room director for the Iraqi national guard in Kirkuk.
"We have warned you not to go to the centres of this sordid comedy, called voting bureaus ... we renew our warning.
US President George W. Bush has urged Iraqis to brave death threats and seize what he termed an "historic opportunity" to vote, while a British newspaper reported the United States and Britain have privately agreed on a way of withdrawing their troops from Iraq.
A US marine was killed in the same area.
Allawi's party has had at least 22 of its members killed in the space of two months, party official Imad Shbib said earlier this month, adding that as many as 44 had been murdered since the fall of Saddam Hussein's regime in April 2003.
Even bombs won't stop us.
Supporters of Zarqawi, Iraq's most wanted man, on Thursday posted a video on the Internet of their murder of a candidate in Iraq's elections from the party of US-backed interim Prime Minister Iyad Allawi.
The total number of electoral staff is expected to swell to 200,000 on polling day.
The US military's top commander in Iraq, General George Casey, told AFP that the more Iraqi security forces come on line, the less visible America's 150,000 troops will be.
Some Shiite clerics have preached that anyone who does not vote today will face the wrath of God.
The flurry of attacks, following a helicopter crash that killed 31 US troops on Wednesday, were concentrated on the heartland of Iraq' minority Sunnis.
Four police were shot dead just before midnight Friday as they drove on the main road between the towns of Baiji and Shorgat, about 200 kilometers (120 miles) north of the capital, police said.
Speaking at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, he also said he was "totally against" the notion of setting a timetable for the withdrawal of US troops.
The total number of electoral staff is expected to swell to 200,000 on polling day.
The polling centre is close to the headquarters of a Turkmen political party.
Security measures included restrictions on driving, a shutdown of Baghdad's international airport and the closure of the country's borders.
``We are on the lookout,'' said Brig.
Six police were killed in other attacks around Baghdad and strikes against poll stations were reported across Iraq on the eve of the country's historic election.
The Al-Qaeda Group in the Land of Two Rivers announced Sunday on a website that it had executed Salem Jaafar al-Kanani, "secretary of the traitor Iyad Allawi", and a video would be released at a later time.
An Islamist group linked to Al-Qaeda warned it would attack Iraqis involved in the general election even after voting was over.
Boucher said US President George W. Bush was confident that the world would recognize the legitimacy of the election despite worries that it would be marred by a boycott by Sunni Muslims and violence.
Four police were shot dead just before midnight Friday on the main road between the towns of Baiji and Shorgat, about 200 kilometers (120 miles) north of the capital, police said.
Campaigning by candidates for Sunday's election officially ended on Friday morning, as Iraqi exiles in 14 countries across the globe began voting.
The Iraqi Independent Electoral Commission, which runs the elections, is also housed there.
Former US president Bill Clinton called Thursday on Iraq's Shiite majority to reach out to the nation's Sunni minority if they win this weekend's election.
The faction led by al-Qaida ally Abu Musab al-Zarqawi said Thursday on a website that it had executed a candidate of interim Prime Minister Iyad Allawi's party and a video would be released later.
An Islamist group linked to Al-Qaeda warned it would attack Iraqis involved in the general election even after voting was over.
The policeman was shot dead by attackers as he stood guard at a voting station in the east of Kirkuk, which has a divided population of Kurds, Arabs and Turkmen, police told AFP.
Scores of attacks have targeted polling places across Iraq in recent days, officials said, but mostly the buildings have been empty and casualties have been low.
Iraqis are scheduled to choose a 275-member transitional national assembly, 18 provincial councils and, in three northern provinces, a Kurdish Parliament.
The policeman was shot dead by attackers as he stood guard at one voting station in the east of the city, police told AFP.
A police officer said the blast had caused material damage but no casualties.
U.S. and Iraqi security forces spent Saturday setting up cordons around polling stations in an effort to protect voters.
By late afternoon, Carlos Valenzuela, the top U.N. adviser to the electoral commission, declared that matters were proceeding apace.
The suicide bomber approached workers putting up protective barriers around the voting centre in Khanaqin, a town near the border with Iran.
"This is only (a small) part of what our virtuous sheikh Abu Musab al-Zarqawi promised," the statement said.
Iraq is on high alert for violence on the day of the election, the first free vote in decades.
Campaigning by candidates for Sunday's election officially ended on Friday, as Iraqi expatraites in 14 countries -- from the Middle East to Australia to the United States -- began voting in a three-day process.
The latest attacks Thursday came as Iraqi exiles voting in Australia and New Zealand became the first to vote in their country's historic national elections early Friday.
Zarqawi, a Jordanian-born fugitive with a 25-million-dollar US price on his head, has threatened to attack anyone involved in Sunday's polls.
The embassy, which opened last June after sovereignty was returned to an Iraqi interim government, is the first U.S. mission here in more than a decade.
The Shiite religious and political leadership views the elections as a means of gaining their long-denied place of power in Iraq, where they are in the majority.
A police officer said the blast caused material damage but no casualties.
"He was stopped at the checkpoint and a few seconds later, the explosion went off.
"He was stopped at the checkpoint and a few seconds later, the explosion went off.
Gen. Adil Molan Ghaidan, police chief in Diyala province northeast of Baghdad.
Despite the increased security presence, insurgents hit five polling centers around Baqubah, an ethnically divided regional capital northeast of Baghdad.
"The bodies of six soldiers, with their dog-tags, were found in central Ramadi," a police officer told AFP on condition of anonymity.
The exiles began casting votes as a British newspaper reported the United States and Britain have privately agreed on a way of withdrawing their troops from Iraq.
Allawi's party has had 22 of its members killed in the space of two months, party official Imad Shbib told AFP on January 11, adding that as many as 44 had been murdered since the fall of Saddam Hussein's regime in April 2003.
As security forces sealed off the sector to evacuate victims, a second car burst onto the scene from the direction of a nearby hospital.
Other attacks were reported in the triangle.
Other attacks were reported in the triangle.
At a schoolhouse being used as a polling center in Baghdad's Sadr City neighborhood, election workers pushed aside metal desks and set up cardboard voting booths.
The huge palace houses much of the embassy's office space.
``I've been without a job ever since the war, so I signed up for this job because it seems to be honorable and I'd like to a part of it,'' said Abass Mihseen, 42, a former Iraqi Army officer.
New attacks across Iraq followed the deaths of 31 US military personnel in a helicopter crash in western Iraq on Wednesday.
Six others were injured, according to a source at the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan, a leading Kurdish political party.
Three voting stations were opened and almost immediately came under rebel attack.
Zarqawi, a Jordanian-born fugitive with a 25 million dollar US price on his head, has taken a high profile role opposing the elections and threatening "all-out war" against everyone involved.
"It was... 45 attacks on polling stations around the country yesterday," the officer said.
However, a high turnout is expected among Shiites and Kurds ready to exercise their right to vote.
``We do not fear threats.
Kurds are also encouraging people to vote despite the threats.
However, a high turnout is expected among Shiites and Kurds ready to exercise their right to vote.
"We warn for the last time that tomorrow will be a bloody day for the Jews, the Christians, their agents, and anyone who agrees to play the American-Allawi game," added the statement in a reference to Iraqi interim Prime Minister Iyad Allawi.
Kabeer, a commercial director, said he had "been waiting for this moment for 54 years," 24 of which he has spent in England and the UAE.
(Optional add end)
``Everything is ready for tomorrow,'' said Dhia Fakhir, 38, manager of the voting center.
``This is going to be a free and honest experiment,'' said Amir Moosa, 42, of Basra.