Cheney thought he was shooting at a covey of quail, according to an owner of the ranch.
Whittington is a fixture in Texas politics, having worked in Republican campaigns dating back to John Tower's senatorial run in the 1960s.
In the final stages of the 2004 campaign, Cheney mocked the way Democratic presidential nominee Senator John F. Kerry went on a hunting trip.
She was with Cheney at the time of the shooting, as was Armstrong, whose mother, Anne, is a prominent Republican supporter and whose family ranch is a familiar destination for Republican politicians.
U.S. Vice President Dick Cheney accidentally shot and injured a hunting companion in Texas over the weekend, U.S. media reported Sunday.
But McClellan sought to deflect criticism about the slow disclosure by suggesting that Cheney's staff was responsible.
Still, McClellan blamed Whittington for the accident, noting that the attorney left the hunt line to retrieve a downed quail and was approaching Cheney from behind.
The sheriff said Sunday that they had yet to speak to "the victim."
Peter Binko, administrator of Christos Spohn hospital in Corpus Christi where Whittington was recuperating, said the injured hunter was cracking jokes -- and was baffled by all the publicity.
The shooting occurred about 5:30 p.m. local time Saturday and was first reported on the website of the Corpus Christi Caller-Times at midday Sunday, according to a reporter at the newspaper.
Cheney shot prominent lawyer Harry Whittington in the neck and chest with birdshot on Saturday as the two were out quail hunting on a Texas ranch.
According to Armstrong and Willeford, the accident was largely the fault of Whittington, who reappeared alongside two of his hunting companions without giving proper warning.
The White House on Monday carefully distanced itself from Vice President Dick Cheney's delayed notification about his accidental shooting of a hunting companion.
The Associated Press quoted Katharine Armstrong, one of the ranch owners, as saying she watched the shooting from her vantage in a nearby car.
The 50,000-acre Armstrong Ranch was purchased in 1852 by Tobin Armstrong's grandfather, John Armstrong III, who became known for capturing outlaw John Wesley Hardin, according to a profile of the ranch in the Caller-Times.
Then they broke for a lunch of antelope, jicama salad and camp bread, washed down with Dr Pepper.
Whittington, bloodied but still conscious, tumbled to the ground after he was hit.
She said Cheney participated in discussions on Sunday morning about disclosing the incident, agreeing that it should be made public but deferring to the Armstrong family on how to do so.
Cheney spent time with Whittington, a lawyer from Austin, and his wife at the hospital on Sunday, CNN said.
Anne Armstrong said that on Saturday evening, Cheney spoke with her about disclosing the incident to the public.
``There was no alcohol or misconduct.''
Vice President Dick Cheney accidentally shot and wounded a companion during a weekend quail hunting trip in Texas, spraying the fellow hunter in the face and chest with shotgun pellets.
Anne Armstrong, a former counselor to President Nixon, has served on the board of the Halliburton Corp., where Cheney was chief executive before becoming vice president.
The incident made the front pages of The Washington Post, The New York Times, USA Today and The Wall Street Journal, most of which noted soberly that Cheney's office had not gone public with the information when it happened.
Cheney then went to search for more quail.
McClellan said he had urged speedy public disclosure following the incident at the 50,000-acre Armstrong Ranch some 60 miles outside Corpus Christi, Texas.
Cheney was very apologetic, she added.
The incident made the front pages of The Washington Post, The New York Times, USA Today and The Wall Street Journal, most of which noted soberly that Cheney's office had not gone public with the information when it happened.
Texas officials said on Monday night that Cheney would be issued a warning citation for hunting without a proper game stamp on his license.
Whittington was treated on the scene by Cheney's traveling medical detail before being taken by helicopter to a Corpus Christi hospital.
The Dallas Morning News reported that Whittington also lacked the proper stamp for hunting quail.
The guests included Pamela Pitzer Willeford, a Texan who was appointed ambassador to Switzerland and Liechtenstein in 2003.
Globe Staff
Cheney's spokeswoman, Lea Anne McBride, said the vice president was with Whittington and his wife at the hospital on Sunday.
They packed the wounded attorney into Cheney's ambulance and drove him to a nearby hospital.
The Houston Chronicle has reported that there were 29 hunting-related accidents in Texas in 2004, with four fatalities.
"The investigation reveals that there was no alcohol, or misconduct involved in the incident," the Kenedy County sheriff's office said in a statement.
There was still no official account of the events on Katherine Armstrong's south-Texas ranch on Saturday, when Cheney missed his quail quarry but hit prominent lawyer Harry Whittington in the neck and chest with birdshot.
...
Cheney was described as apologetic for shooting Whittington.
...
Sunday morning -- Cheney talks by telephone with Merce Whittington, Whittington's wife, to check on the victim's condition.
Bush knew an hour after the fact that a hunting accident had taken place at 5:30 pm (2330 GMT), and it took him another 30 minutes to find out that Cheney had pulled the trigger, said McClellan.
``The protocol was not followed by Mr. Whittington when it came to notifying the others that he was there,'' McClellan said.
He's best known nowadays for a decades-long battle to prevent the city of Austin from building a parking lot over a downtown block that he owns.
Among the people with him at the Armstrong Ranch in south Texas was his host Katharine Armstrong, a lobbyist and longtime friend of Cheney.
Vice President Dick Cheney accidentally sprayed a companion with birdshot while hunting quail on a private Texas ranch, injuring the man in the face, neck and chest, the vice president's office confirmed yesterday after a Texas newspaper reported the incident.
The incident provided a wealth of material for Democrats, gun control activists and critics of the Bush administration, not to mention late night comedians.
Harry Whittington, Cheney's hunting companion during a quail hunting trip in Texas on Saturday, was mostly injured on his right side, with shotgun pellets hitting his cheek, neck and chest, the reports said.
Texas authorities said they would issue a warning citation to Cheney but impose no penalty or fine for failing to have the seven-dollar stamp.
She said emergency personnel traveling with Cheney tended to Whittington until the ambulance arrived.
5:30 p.m. CST -- Cheney accidentally shoots Whittington.
On Sunday morning, Armstrong tipped off her local newspaper to the story.
During the 2004 presidential campaign, Cheney mocked Sen. John Kerry, the Democratic nominee, for having worn camouflage on a duck-hunting trip, saying Kerry's "new camo jacket is an October disguise, an effort he's making to hide the fact that he votes against gun-owner rights at every turn."
The victim was described as being "peppered pretty good" with birdshot and was in stable condition Sunday.
The White House confirmed the shooting after being contacted by the media.
And I think that's where everybody's attention should have been focused, and was focused, when the hunting accident took place.''
After being stabilized at the hospital in Kingsville, Whittington was evacuated by helicopter to a larger facility in Corpus Christi -- where he was placed in the intensive care unit.
Unfortunately, these types of hunting accidents do happen from time to time," the spokesman told a frequently contentious briefing with reporters.
"He was more bruised."
"I think you can always look back at these issues and look at how to do a better job," mused McClellan, who said he had advocated full disclosure and left little doubt that he would have handled the situation differently.
The Texas Parks and Wildlife Department informed Cheney that he lacked a stamp for hunting "upland game birds" in the state when the shooting incident occurred, the vice president's office said in a statement.
But, my fellow sportsmen, this coverup isn't going to work because you and I know the Second Amendment is more than just another photo opportunity."
Cheney was described as apologetic for shooting Whittington.
Harry Whittington, a millionaire attorney from Austin, was "alert and doing fine" in a Corpus Christi hospital Sunday, a day after he was shot by Cheney on a ranch in south Texas, said Katharine Armstrong, the property's owner.
"It knocked him silly.
Whittington's condition was improving and described as "stable" by doctors at Christus Spohn Hospital Memorial, where he was treated for wounds to his shoulder, upper body, chest and neck.
He was described in an article published two weeks ago in the Austin-American Statesman as being "very rich, very stubborn, and very patient."
Ambassador to Britain Anne Armstrong, ask Cheney about notifying the news media.
Katharine Armstrong starts trying to telephone Jaime Powell, a reporter at the Corpus Christi Caller Times, to describe the accident.
He said Sanmiguel interviewed the Cheney and reported that shooting was an accident.
Hearing a covey of birds, Cheney shot at one, not realizing that Whittington had startled the quail and that he was in the line of fire.
"It knocked him silly.
George W. Bush named him to the Texas Funeral Service Commission.
Cheney, who was carrying a 28-gauge shotgun, had already begun to fire and sprayed Whittington.
Late Sunday morning, her daughter, Katharine Armstrong, called a reporter from the Corpus Christi Caller, which then reported the shooting on its Web site.
"He wore a brand new camouflage jacket for the occasion, which makes you wonder just how often he does really go goose hunting," Cheney said, according to a White House transcript.
"The area affected was his shoulder, upper body, chest and some of the neck area," she said.
Tobin Armstrong was quoted by the Associated Press as saying in 2000 that he frequently went hunting on the ranch with Cheney, who turned 65 last month.
Whittington has long been active in Republican Party politics and was appointed by then-Governor George W. Bush to the Texas Funeral Service Commission.
His eyes were open.
His eyes were open.
"I think it's always important to get information out as quickly as possible," McClellan said.
Whittington was in stable condition in the intensive care unit at Christus Spohn Hospital Memorial, were he was treated for wounds to his shoulder, upper body, chest and neck, said hospital spokeswoman Michele Mora-Trevino.
His condition remained listed as stable, with wounds to his face, neck, chest and rib cage from the pellets sprayed at him from 30 yards away by Cheney's shotgun.
McClellan, drawing a distinction with the response by Cheney's staff, told reporters Monday: "I think you can always look back at these issues and look at how to do a better job."
The shooting occurred late Saturday afternoon while Cheney was hunting with Harry Whittington, 78, a prominent Austin lawyer, on the Armstrong Ranch in south Texas.
Whittington, an Austin lawyer, was listed Monday in "very stable" condition at Christus Spohn Hospital Memorial in Corpus Christi, Texas, where he was undergoing treatment for multiple pellet wounds on the right side of his lower face, neck, shoulder and chest.
The pressure came in part from questions about whether Cheney might have been trying to play down the incident, a suggestion that was rejected by those who were with Cheney over the weekend.
Cheney's staff members had asked state authorities for all necessary permits beforehand and were never informed about the need for a seven-dollar stamp for quail hunting, his office said in its statement.
Unfortunately, these types of hunting accidents do happen from time to time," the spokesman told a frequently contentious briefing with reporters.
Bush, who owns a ranch in Texas, and Cheney, who grew up in Wyoming, are both enthusiastic hunters, a fact they have frequently mentioned during political campaigns.
Whittington, 78, was "alert and doing fine" in the hospital, Katharine Armstrong, owner of the Armstrong Ranch in south Texas, was quoted by CNN as saying.
He also travels frequently to Arkansas to hunt ducks.
The accident occurred Saturday when the vice president wheeled to shoot at a covey of quail and accidentally sprayed his hunting partner, 78-year-old attorney Harry Whittington, with bird shot, authorities said.
The weather was sunny and "clear" when the accident occurred and both men were wearing blaze orange hats and vests, the report said.
Gaming officials said they had been issuing oral warnings instead of fines to hunters who had failed to update their licenses under the new rule.
(BEGIN OPTIONAL TRIM.)
Although he broke no laws, Vice President Dick Cheney did not have proper hunting credentials when he accidentally shot a fellow hunter at a private ranch last weekend, authorities said Monday.
7:30 p.m. EST -- White House Chief of Staff Andrew Card in Washington alerts Bush at the White House about an unspecified shooting accident within Cheney's quail hunting party but does not specify that Cheney was the shooter.
Salinas said he sent his chief deputy, Gilbert Sanmiguel, to the Armstrong ranch that night.
Armstrong, owner of the Armstrong Ranch where the accident occurred, said Whittington was bleeding and Cheney was very apologetic.
He was talking.
And, by God, Harry was in the line of fire and got peppered pretty good."
OPTIONAL TRIM -- STORY MAY END HERE
Associated Press writer Paul Weber in Dallas contributed to this report.
His team treated Whittington before he was taken to the hospital.
Armstrong's business partner, Karen Johnson, spent several years lobbying for Parsons, doing work on "business development" before the State Department, the Department of Transportation and the U.S. Agency for International Development, according to PoliticalMoneyLine, which tracks federal lobbying.
White House spokeswoman Lea Anne McBride, asked in a telephone interview why the shooting was not announced sooner, referred questions to Katharine Armstrong.
But Scott McClellan, the White House press secretary, was battered at his daily news briefing by journalists demanding answers to why Cheney had not been faster to make public what happened and why he had chosen a local newspaper in Texas as his vehicle for doing so.
That's the bottom line.''
Armstrong said Cheney is a longtime friend who comes to the ranch to hunt about once a year and is "a very safe sportsman."
McClellan contrasted the delayed notification by a private citizen with his own quick actions last July when he notified the news media that Bush had collided with a member of his Scottish security detail while bicycling in Scotland during an international summit.
"Tobin is one of our dearest and most respected friends," former President Bush said.
He was talking.
"It was an accident.
Armstrong said she was watching from a car while Cheney, Whittington and another hunter got out of the vehicle to shoot at a covey of quail.
"It was like a spraying.
It didn't get in his eyes or anything like that."
The White House sought with little success on Monday to quell an uproar over why it took the better part of a day to disclose that Vice President Dick Cheney had accidentally wounded a fellow hunter in Texas on Saturday and why even President Bush initially got an incomplete report on the shooting.
Cheney is a longtime hunter and delivered the keynote address in 2004 to the National Rifle Association, from which he accepted a rifle as a gift.
Cheney's staff did not publicly confirm the accidental shooting until 3:30 p.m. EST on Sunday, more than 20 hours after the accident, when the Corpus Christi Caller-Times posted a story on its Web site.
Whittington is a longtime friend of President Bush from their days together in Austin when Bush was Texas governor.
"There was some bleeding, but it wasn't horrible," she said.
She said Whittington is a regular, too, but she thought it was the first time the two men hunted together.
Whittington has been a private practice attorney in Austin since 1950 and has long been active in Texas Republican politics.
McClellan said spoke with Katharine Armstrong, one of the ranch owners and an eyewitness to the accident, and she agreed to relay word of the accident to the local newspaper on Sunday.
Both men were wearing orange vests.
"The vice president spoke with (Katharine Armstrong) directly and agreed that she should make it public and that they would provide additional information," McClellan said.
``This was a hunting accident,'' said Gilbert San Miguel, chief deputy of the Kenedy County Sheriff's office.
Johnson also lobbies for major corporations, including Lockheed Martin, and has been one of Bush's leading fund-raisers.
(END OPTIONAL TRIM.)
The stamp is a new requirement, and the department has issued verbal warnings to many hunters who were unaware they needed it.
Cheney, an experienced outdoorsman who had a valid out-of-state hunting license, will receive a warning citation for failing to purchase the required $7 stamp for bird hunting, the Texas Department of Parks and Wildlife said in a statement.
"He's in good health, he's doing well," Mora-Trevino said, adding that a release date had not yet been set for the prominent Texas lawyer.
Katharine Armstrong, the ranch's owner, saw what happened Saturday and told reporters Sunday that Cheney was using a 28-gauge shotgun, which shoots fewer pellets and has a smaller shot pattern than a 12-gauge shotgun, making hitting the target more challenging.
"Harry should have let us know he was back there."
It didn't get in his eyes or anything like that."
"You need to understand that the Cheneys are our friends maybe for a couple of decades, maybe 30 years," Armstrong said, adding that she did not personally represent Parsons.
She said Cheney didn't see Whittington, and when he chose a bird to shoot, he accidentally hit Whittington, who was "in the in the line of fire."
She was appointed to the Texas Parks and Wildlife Commission in 1999 by Bush, who was then the Texas governor.
In a statement Monday night, Cheney's office said his staffers had not known about the stamp requirement and that Cheney had sent a $7 check to Texas to cover the cost.
The victim, Harry Whittington, a 78-year-old lawyer, was transferred from the intensive care unit to a private room in a Corpus Christi hospital on Monday.
"It was an accident.
The shooting was first reported by the Corpus Christi Caller-Times.
I don't believe I've ever lobbied the vice president, nor would I be comfortable doing so."
McBride said Cheney has a Texas hunting license.
"But you could say it's closed," Salinas said of the case.
"It was the vice president's office that took the lead on this," he said, when asked about whether he had been told that Cheney's staff was relying on a private citizen to report the accident.
"The covey flushed and the vice president picked out a bird and was following it and shot.
But, the statement said, the staff member was not informed of the need for an additional stamp, costing $7, to allow hunting of upland game birds.
Calls to his room were routed to the hospital's marketing department, which said it was taking messages for him.
Whittington was about 30 yards away when he was hit in the cheek, neck and chest, she said.
"This is something that happens from time to time.
But he was fine.
But he was fine.
He was being treated in the intensive care unit at a Corpus Christi hospital.
``We knew word would get out,'' she said.
There is no requirement to report nonfatal hunting accidents in Texas, said Lydia Saldana, the communications director for the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department.
"It broke the skin," Armstrong said, referring to the birdshot.
An incident report by the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department said that Whittington had gone to retrieve a downed bird when Cheney wheeled around with his 28-gauge Perazzi shotgun and shot him by accident.
The party of 11 hunters set out in two trucks Saturday morning, driving around the mesquite-dotted property and shooting quail until about 12:30 p.m., said Anne Armstrong, co-owner of the ranch.
``He's really amazed, I think, at all the hoopla over this.''
The covey flushed and the vice president picked out a bird and was following it and shot.
McClellan said he was informed late Saturday night that there had been a hunting accident but didn't learn that Cheney had shot the victim until 6 a.m. EST Sunday.
McClellan attributed some of the delay to Cheney's aides trying to "get the facts together (to) provide that information to the public" as well as making sure that Cheney's victim, 78-year-old Texas lawyer Harry Whittington, had adequate medical attention.
Whittington owns property in Travis County, which includes the state capital Austin, worth at least $11 million, the Austin American-Statesman reported last year, not counting a downtown block at the center of a long-running dispute with the city over a condemnation issue.
Willeford and her husband are substantial Republican donors; they gave more than $11,000 to Republican causes, including the Bush campaign and the Republican National Committee, in the 2004 election cycle.
He is flown by helicopter to a hospital in Corpus Christi and admitted to the trauma-intensive care unit.
``He's a true Southern gentleman,'' Binko said of Whittington at a Monday news conference.
The accident happened in south Texas at the famed Armstrong Ranch, co-owned by members of a family long close to Cheney.
Cheney, 65, was using a .28 gauge shotgun when he accidentally peppered Whittington with bird shot at a distance of about 30 yards while trying to shoot flushed quail.
"He understands that he could have handled it better," Willeford said.
On Monday, a news release from the sheriff's office said that " Whittington's interview collaborated Vice President Cheney's statement" and that the department was "fully satisfied that this was no more than a hunting accident."
The dispute is still being litigated.
Whittington was bleeding, but he was not very seriously injured, she said.
Her lobbying clients include several that do business with the federal government, though Armstrong said she did not believe that she had ever lobbied Cheney.
McClellan said President Bush learned there had been a hunting accident from White House Chief of Staff Andrew Card about 7:30 p.m. EST Saturday and learned that Cheney had been the shooter shortly before 8 p.m. EST when updated by Deputy White House Chief of Staff Karl Rove.
"He got peppered pretty good," Armstrong said.
According to public documents, Armstrong registered in 2004 as a lobbyist for Parsons, an engineering and construction firm that has done extensive work in Iraq, and listed the size of the contract at more than $100,000, according to lobbying records from the Texas Ethics Commission provided by Texans for Public Justice, a watchdog group.
She was an eyewitness, she saw what occurred and she called her local paper to provide those facts," said McClellan.
White House press secretary Scott McClellan said Monday that the ``first priority was making sure that Harry Whittington ... was getting the medical care that he needed.
The Secret Service reported the shooting to the Kenedy County sheriff's office, although no one from that agency interviewed Cheney until Sunday morning.
WASHINGTON - Vice President Dick Cheney accidentally shot a hunting partner Saturday in Texas, and the White House did not confirm the shooting until nearly 20 hours later.
News of the shooting was first revealed not by the White House but by the owner of the south-Texas ranch, Katharine Armstrong, where the incident took place.
Hospital administrator Peter Banko said Whittington was moved out of intensive care on Monday.
It was evident that the injuries were not life-threatening, Armstrong said, because the ambulance paused on the road for several minutes to allow Whittington's wife to join them.
Asked if she was concerned that Cheney's visit could create the appearance of impropriety during the lobbying investigation involving Jack Abramoff, which has brought to light the often close personal and professional ties between lobbyists and public officials, she said: "Oh my God, he's a friend.
``You're hunting together -- you need to know where everyone is,'' said Larry Keane, general counsel of the National Shooting Sports Foundation.
Whittington shot a bird and was looking for it in the tall grass, while Cheney and the third hunter walked to another spot and found a second covey, Armstrong said.
She told the Corpus Christi Caller Times that Whittington had come up behind Cheney without alerting him that he was here.
But the incident has reverberated worldwide: ``Cheney bags a lawyer,'' was the headline in the Glasgow, Scotland-based Herald.
Armstrong in an interview with The Associated Press said Whittington, 78, was mostly injured on his right side, with the pellets hitting his cheek, neck and chest during the incident which occurred late afternoon on Saturday
The local sheriff said an investigation had concluded that the episode was "no more than an accident."
Armstrong did not return a call seeking comment on McBride's statement.
You now, I've been peppered pretty well myself," said Armstrong.
"I'm not going to speculate," the daily quoted her as saying.
It wasn't a direct hit."
He ducks from his limousine into the White House wearing a black jacket with the collar raised against the early morning chill.
In an interview, Armstrong said that it did not occur to anyone in the hunting party to make news of the shooting public immediately, but that no one, including Cheney, had called for holding it back.
The vice president visited Whittington in the hospital Sunday, Armstrong said.
The White House drew fire Monday for not immediately disclosing that Vice President Dick Cheney had shot a 78-year-old hunting partner in a weekend incident not reported until a day after it took place.
This past weekend brought Cheney together with a group of old friends, friends of friends and political supporters in the kind of private setting he relishes.
"My personal opinion was his camo jacket was an October disguise.
In hunting, the shooter is responsible for knowing where the shot is going.
"I'm not going to speculate," the daily quoted her as saying.
When Armstrong died in October, his funeral was attended by Cheney and former President George H. W. Bush.
In the end, White House officials said Bush learned about the shooting accident at 7:30 p.m. Eastern time, about an hour after it happened, in a call from Andrew H. Card Jr., his chief of staff.
Armstrong spoke to the local newspaper, the Corpus Christi Caller-Times, which had called her after getting a tip.
But Bush did not find out that Cheney was the shooter until about half an hour later in a subsequent call from Karl Rove, his senior adviser and deputy chief of staff, who had called Armstrong to ask about the incident.
The Caller-Times also reported Monday that the US ambassador to Switzerland and Liechtenstein, Pamela Willeford, was part of the hunting party.
It was later picked up by national wire services and confirmed by Cheney's office.
And it has forced a White House already under fire for secrecy to explain why it made no mention of the shooting until the ranch owner disclosed it to a local newspaper, 18 hours after the incident.
Whittington was admitted at 8:15 pm on Saturday following the accident and remained in the intensive care unit on Monday morning.
And by god, Harry was in the line of fire and got peppered pretty good."
Whittington shot a bird and went to look for it in the tall grass, while Cheney and the third hunter walked to another spot and discovered a second covey.
Times staff writers Lianne Hart in Corpus Christi and Peter Wallsten in Washington contributed to this report.
Willeford, whose husband was also at the ranch, said in an interview that Whittington accepted responsibility for the accident.
Cheney shot Harry Whittington, 78, a multimillionaire Austin lawyer, spraying his friend and hunting partner with shotgun pellets from head to chest.
Whittington -- a prominent Austin attorney -- and the vice president arrived for a weekend hunting trip Friday night at the 50,000-acre Armstrong ranch, a well-known retreat for wealthy Texas Republicans 95 miles south of Corpus Christi.
McClellan struggled at times to explain even the most basic details in the case, including when and how Bush was informed about it.
The man accidentally shot by US Vice President Dick Cheney while the two were hunting on a southern Texas ranch is in stable condition, a hospital spokeswoman said Monday.
President George W. Bush's spokesman Scott McClellan as well as Cheney spokeswoman Lea Anne McBride insisted that the delay between the incident and its confirmation by the White House was due to a focus on securing Whittington medical care.
It was at dusk that Whittington shot his bird and went to retrieve it, taking him behind the vice president.
At the White House, Cheney made no statement and remained out of public view on Monday.
Asked whether it was appropriate to have a private citizen relay information about the vice president, McClellan quipped: "That's one way to provide information to the public."
He was described as in stable condition by Yvonne Wheeler, spokeswoman for the Christus Spohn Health System in Corpus Christi.
She said that Whittington shot a quail and went to look for it in the grass.
He was taken by medical helicopter to the Christus Spohn Health System in Corpus Christi, about an hour away.
The revelation was sure to aggravate a public relations headache for the White House, already under criticism for waiting a day to disclose the shooting incident.
White House Press Secretary McClellan said he had privately urged Cheney's staff to quickly disclose details about the 5:30 p.m. CST accident on Saturday rather than wait for the Texas ranch owner to telephone the local newspaper more than 18 hours later, on Sunday.
"Of course in a position like mine, I was urging that that information be made available as quickly as possible."
"The vice president has got an ambulance on call, so the ambulance came."
Sunday afternoon -- Cheney visits Whittington at the Corpus Christi hospital before returning to Washington, D.C.
"It broke the skin," she said of the shotgun pellets.
The vice president's office did not publicly report the accident until mid-afternoon Sunday after the Corpus Christi Caller-Times had asked about it.
The medical team that travels with Cheney immediately began ministering to Whittington, who was bleeding profusely from pellets in his face, neck and chest, according to witnesses.
Cheney was using a 28-gauge shotgun and was about 30 yards away from Whittington, she said.
Tobin Armstrong was a major financial backer of the Bush-Cheney team who died last October, with Cheney attending the funeral.
Whittington "came up from behind the vice president and the other hunter and didn't signal them or indicate to them or announce himself," Armstrong told the Associated Press.
Monday morning -- Cheney arrives at the White House complex in his motorcade, with escorting police vehicles forgoing the usual sirens.
``And so, you know, unfortunately these type of hunting accidents happen from time to time.''
Sunday morning -- Katharine Armstrong, the host and an eyewitness to the accident, says she and her mother, former U.S.
``On the face of it, this looks like something the administration felt the public had no right to know,'' Joe Lockhart, who was President Clinton's press secretary, said in an interview.
Late-night talk show hosts, who typically mine such incidents for laughs, were not broadcasting over the weekend, making Monday night the first time they will be able to train their sights on the mishap.
Cheney and Armstrong "agreed that she should make that information public.
The vice president urged her to tell friends and family first, before word leaked out to the media.
Late-night talk show hosts, who typically mine such incidents for laughs, were not broadcasting over the weekend, making Monday night the first time they will be able to train their sights on the mishap.
He says he began urging vice presidential staff to release details of the incident.
He has been appointed to several state boards, including when then-Gov.
But the Caller-Times reported Monday that McBride, after confirming the incident around noon (1800 GMT) on Sunday, had refused to say whether the vice president's office would have disclosed the incident if the daily had not contacted her after getting a tip from an unnamed Armstrong family member.
US Vice President Dick Cheney did not have a legal permit to hunt quail when he accidentally shot a 78-year old hunting partner over the weekend, the White House said on Monday.
``I don't think there's going to be a bunch of people sitting around saying: `I wonder why they waited to tell us.'
"If you drop out of line, you say you are coming up behind to indicate to other shooters so (they) know you are there."
``It's news, and it reflects an attitude in this White House of holding back information, of being too clever by half and being secretive,'' conservative columnist Robert Novak said on Fox News.
McClellan immediately disclosed that Bush had suffered "mild to moderate" scrapes on his arms and hands that required bandages by the White House physician.
8 p.m. EST -- Deputy White House Chief of Staff Karl Rove updates Bush, telling the president that Cheney was the shooter.
Armstrong played down her role as a lobbyist and suggested that she had not brought up business during Cheney's visit.
The local sheriff, Ramon Salinas 3rd, said the Secret Service called him shortly after the shooting occurred.
Armstrong has a relatively limited list of lobbying clients in Texas and in Washington.
But the Caller-Times reported Monday that McBride, after confirming the incident around noon (1800 GMT) on Sunday, had refused to say whether the vice president's office would have disclosed the incident if the daily had not contacted her after getting a tip from an unnamed Armstrong family member.
She said she ran over to Whittington, who had fallen to the ground, but stayed out of the way while Secret Service agents tended to him.
Cheney has often gone hunting as vice president, sometimes with other prominent officials, including Justice Antonin Scalia.
He was in the intensive care unit at Christus Spohn Health System and listed in stable condition yesterday evening.
Armstrong has said that Whittington came up noiselessly behind the vice president, who spun around to target a bird and shot his fellow hunter instead.
After the hospital visit, McBride said Cheney "was pleased to see that he was doing fine and in good spirits."
McBride said Armstrong talked to "her local paper and when we were asked about the account she had provided, [we] confirmed that."
The news first came to light on Sunday at 1:48 pm (1948 GMT), when the Corpus Christi Caller-Times published Armstrong's account on its Internet site.
"He remains in stable condition in our ICU (intensive care unit)," Michele Mora-Trevino, a spokeswoman for Christus Spohn Hospital Memorial in Corpus Christi, Texas told AFP.
(Stewart M. Powell can be reached at 202-263-6400 or at the e-mail address (stewart@hearstdc.com)
Cheney, well-known for having testy relations with the media, on Monday came under criticism from Democrats and Republicans who said the White House should have disclosed the incident immediately.
Harry Whittington, 78, was peppered with shotgun pellets after Cheney turned to shoot quail that had just been flushed out of the brush, Cheney spokeswoman Lea Anne McBride confirmed Sunday.
"The vice president didn't see him," she continued.
Said Jeff Hart, an Austin lawyer who hunts for quail in Texas: ``If you pull the trigger, you're responsible for it, no matter what.
But hunting experts said that, although Whittington should have made his location clear, the vice president is also to blame for not keeping track of his companions.
Saturday, Feb. 11:
But what they will be saying is: `I wonder what else they're not telling us.'
Cheney, Whittington and Pamela Willeford, a former Texas energy executive who is now the U.S. ambassador to Switzerland, went with two of Armstrong's daughters and pursued quail for several more hours.
The vice president's office did not disclose the accident until nearly 24 hours after it happened.
"The vice president didn't see him.
Asked why getting Whittington medical attention was incompatible with releasing details of the incident, McClellan said that the vice president's office had "worked to get that information out."
Armstrong did not immediately return a telephone call seeking additional comment.
McClellan and the Corpus Christi Caller-Times provided the following timeline:
3:30 p.m. EST -- News organizations confirm the Corpus Christi Caller-Times account with vice president's office at the White House.
"I represent a couple of Texas companies, not a large lobbying practice," she said.
And Bush spokesman Scott McClellan battled criticism over the decision by Cheney's office to let Armstrong -- a private citizen with no official White House role -- make the news public by informing her local newspaper.
Whittington "came up from behind the vice president and the other hunter and didn't signal them or indicate to them or announce himself," Armstrong said.
"The reason that you stay in line is so that you know where everybody is at all times," Armstrong told the newspaper.
Asked why getting Whittington medical attention was incompatible with releasing details of the incident, McClellan said that the vice president's office had "worked to get that information out."
Cheney's hunting trips have included one with Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia, who went duck hunting in January 2004 with the vice president in Louisiana, a trip criticized because Scalia participates in decisions that affect the administration.
Breaking with precedent, the White House did not disclose the information to the national media that cover Bush and Cheney.
Sunday, Feb. 12:
6 a.m. EST -- McClellan is awakened at home and told that Cheney was the shooter.
Armstrong said she does more public relations and consulting work than lobbying, but she declined to disclose her clients.
She none were involved in Iraq "that I know of."
The Corpus Christi Caller-Times reported Monday that Cheney and Whittington had been hunting with Pam Willeford, the U.S. ambassador to Switzerland and Liechtenstein who had served for eight years on the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board.
While awaiting a warning from game wardens, "the Vice President has sent a 7 dollar check to the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, which is the cost of an upland game bird stamp," it said.
Cheney, who suffered four heart attacks before he was elected vice president and has been hospitalized for heart problems while in office, always travels with a medical team.
Riccardi reported from Corpus Christi and Gerstenzang from Washington.
"When you put the call into me, I was able to confirm that account."
Confirming Armstrong's account, local police and state game officials said the vice president had spun around to target a bird and shot his fellow hunter instead.
Whittington was moved out of the intensive care unit at a hospital here Monday and reported to be in good spirits.
Cheney aides continued to decline requests for an official timeline and details of the incident, pointing reporters to Armstrong's account and vouching for its accuracy.
When asked whether the Secret Service had prevented him from talking to the vice president right after the shooting, San Miguel said: ``I'd rather not say.''
In a statement on Monday night, Cheney's office said a member of his staff had asked the Parks and Wildlife Department for all of the necessary permits for the vice president to go quail hunting in Texas and had paid $140.
"He fell with his head toward me."
McClellan as well as Cheney spokeswoman Lea Anne McBride insisted that the time gap between the incident and its confirmation by the White House was due to a focus on getting Whittington the medical care he needed.
An interview with Whittington had confirmed Cheney's account, the sheriff's office said.
The statement said Cheney has now sent a $7 check to the department.
"Barbara and I loved Tobin Armstrong."
McClellan also said that details about the shooting were trickling in throughout the night and that the White House needed "to get the facts together."
Armstrong said Whittington was injured mostly on his right side, from cheek to chest.
McClellan also said that details about the shooting were trickling in throughout the night and that the White House needed "to get the facts together."
At the end of a meeting with U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan, Cheney and Bush exchanged remarks that reporters were about to enter the room, and the vice president left before the journalists arrived.
Public records show that she has worked for Baker Botts, the law firm; Prionics AG, a biotechnology company; Trajen, a firm that performs aviation technical support for the U.S. military; and the King ranch, the property next to her family's ranch.
"Fortunately, the vice president has got a lot of medical people around him and so they were right there and probably more cautious than we would have been," she said.
PICK UP 5th graf: According to Armstrong's xxx
Cheney is an avid hunter who makes annual hunting trips to South Dakota to hunt pheasants.
Records in Texas indicate that she has lobbied at the state level for three companies: Avex Group, the Dannenbaum Engineering Corporation and Ecocreto USA.
After lunch, the group split up.
___
''