Parts of the plane were hauled from the bed of the Atlantic Ocean, shipped to Canada and reconstructed by police.
Perviz Madon lost her husband, Sam, on flight 182.
The trial itself took place behind bullet-resistant glass in a specially-built underground bunker of a courtroom in this west coast city.
Alleged bombmaker Inderjit Singh Reyat has already pleaded guilty to manslaughter and is in prison.
But Bagri's lawyers contend the luggage containing the bomb joined the flight in Toronto.
The trial against a millionaire and a mill worker charged with multiple counts of conspiracy and first-degree murder hinges on the testimony of three star witnesses and contradicting bombing experts.
A second bomb exploded at Tokyo's Narita Airport, killing two baggage handlers.
Prosecutors have argued the bomb was in luggage originating in Vancouver.
A third man in Canada, Inderjit Singh Reyat, pled guilty in 2003 to manslaughter for his role in providing material for the bomb on Flight 182, and was sentenced to five years.
Fear of intimidation in Canada's immigrant Sikh community has led to police protection for several prosecution witnesses.
Defense lawyer David Crossin argued Tuesday that the witness had an ulterior motive to testify against Malik because she is a former disgruntled employee of his.
Prosecutors say two suitcase bombs were checked onto planes leaving Vancouver, connecting with Air India flights to London and Bangkok and New Delhi.
The defense has attacked the credibility of these witnesses and asserted that Malik lacked a motive because he was not interested in Indian politics.
That will be nearly two decades after suitcase bombs, which allegedly originated in western Canada, killed two baggage handlers in Japan and 329 passengers on Air India Flight 182 off the Irish coast.
Purewal, who was murdered in 1995, had been friends with Hayer.
The defense has argued that Bagri's speeches amount only to fiery oratory, and has questioned the credibility of witnesses in the case, including that the star witness against Bagri, who was paid to testify by Canadian authorities.
Cairns said Bagri gave two speeches calling for retribution for the 1984 raids on India's Golden Temple, Sikhisms holiest shrine.
With a specially built courtroom, the trial cost more than US$100 million (euro75 million).
"Who would do something so terrible to kill so many innocent people?
The defense has tried to discredit the testimony, saying she was a disgruntled former employee motivated by revenge.
The witness said she distanced herself from him after the admissions, after which she was subjected to threats.
At a secret Vancouver warehouse, salvaged parts of the plane have been reassembled with other parts fabricated using film footage of pieces still on the ocean floor.
The prosecution has also been hampered by the fact that the suspected main ringleader of the plot, a former Canadian resident, Talwinder Singh Parmar, was killed by Indian authorities when they caught him clandestinely crossing from Pakistan in 1992.
The second bomb killed 329 passengers aboard Air India Flight 182 off the Irish Coast.
In 2003, Reyat pleaded guilty to manslaughter for supplying bomb materials and received a five-year sentence.
Both prosecution cases hinge partly on women who were allegedly close to Malik and Bagri.
The defense argument hinges on attacking the credibility of a star witness for the government, and asserting that at least one of the defendants lacked a motive.
Nobody, nobody can do anything."
She was a disgruntled former employee motivated by revenge, defense lawyers argued.
Less than an hour later, off the coast of Ireland, a second bomb ripped through Air India Flight 182 as it flew to London from Montreal.
Lawyers for rural mill worker Ajaib Singh Bagri then were to present their defence, followed by the prosecution team.
Perviz Madon lost her husband, Sam, on Flight 182.
"If a child dies for Sikhism, so what?"
Prosecutors have argued that Bagri and Malik were among a group of orthodox Sikh immigrants to Canada who, in the turbulent 1980s, waged a campaign against India for its crackdown on religious Sikhs.
Malik and Bagri, who have been in custody since their arrest in late 2000, are also charged in connection with a blast on the same day that killed two baggage handlers at Tokyo's Narita Airport.
Tara Singh Hayer, a Vancouver-area Sikh newspaper publisher and outspoken critic of Sikh extremism, was crippled after being shot in 1988.
"All Sikhs .
Prosecutors have argued the bomb was in luggage originating in Vancouver.
Much of the case, however, hinges on the position of the bomb on Flight 182, which originated in Vancouver.
Malik's lawyer questioned her credibility as a disgruntled employee.
Even before the verdict is pronounced, relatives of the 331 victims are calling for a public inquiry.
A third man, Inderjit Singh Reyat, has been sentenced to 10 years in prison for a conviction in the Narita explosion, and was also charged with Bagri and Malik.
Their motive in the bombings, said prosecution spokesman Geoffrey Gaul, was to avenge India's 1984 attack on the Golden Temple in Amritsar, and fight for an independent Sikh homeland to be called Khalistan.
Nobody, nobody can do anything."
The second exploded 54 minutes later aboard Air India Flight 182, killing all 329 aboard.
On June 23, 1985, a suitcase exploded at Japan's Narita airport, killing two baggage handlers as they transferred it to Air India Flight 301 for Bangkok and Delhi.
The Canadian intelligence service withdrew an agent who had infiltrated Sikh activist ranks only days before the attacks and erased hours of tape recordings of conversations by several of the prime suspects intercepted before the plane bombings.
Expert prosecution witnesses who testified also worked on the investigation into the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 which blew up over Lockerbie, Scotland in 1988, killing 270 people.
The witness, who is not charged with a crime, was paid US$386,000 (euro298,000) to testify.
"These admissions are the ultimate piece of evidence against the accused," Wright said.
The verdict is unlikely to be the final chapter in the bombings case, however, because police continue to investigate other suspects.
Tara Singh Hayer, a Vancouver-area Sikh newspaper publisher and outspoken critic of Sikh extremism, was crippled after being shot in 1988.
Both defendants -- Ripudaman Singh Malik, a 57-year-old millionaire real estate entrepreneur, and Ajaib Singh Bagri, a 56-year-old sawmill worker and Sikh preacher -- pleaded not guilty to charges of first-degree murder and conspiracy in the bombing of the jet, Air India Flight 182 en route from Toronto and Montreal to India, on June 23, 1985.
The plane was traveling from Toronto to India via London.
A second bomb exploded at Tokyo's Narita Airport, killing two baggage handlers.
Since the trial began in April 2003, Canadian prosecutors have constructed a complex case against the pair, based on witness testimony, police interviews, phone records and surveillance.
"This is, in our submission, a politically motivated and terrorist event ... consistent only with a political and religious zealotry," Wright said.
Who would do something so terrible?"
"In our view, it is inconceivable that anyone would have participated in this crime without a political motive," Crossin said.
"There was a murder plot in which two planes were supposed to explode simultaneously.
The trial of two men accused of bombing an Air India jumbo jet and killing 329 people almost 20 years ago entered its final stretch Tuesday with the defense attacking the credibility of a star government witness.
The prosecution has alleged Malik and Bagri were members of the Babbar Khalsa Sikh terrorist group led by Talwinder Singh Parmar, the alleged mastermind of the bombing.
"It is difficult to comprehend how this would happen.
Bellows said Malik's praise for convicted bomb-maker Inderjit Singh Reyat and his financial support for Reyat's family while in prison is further proof of his involvement in the plot.
The court also designated as a remote annex a vast warehouse in a secret location.
Prosecutors have alleged that Malik and Bagri were motivated to revenge the 1984 Indian army storming of the Golden Temple of Amritsar after the holy shrine was taken over by militant Sikhs.
Malik's lawyers are expected to reiterate arguments that the woman's testimony is not credible.
The witness, whose name is protected by a court ordered publication ban, said Malik had been asked to approach him for the task by Talwinder Singh Parmar, the suspected mastermind behind the plot and a leader of the extremist Babbar Khalsa Sikh separatist group.
Less than an hour later, Air India Flight 182 exploded off the Irish coast, killing all 329 aboard.
Prosecutor Richard Cairns argued that Bargris was a high-ranking member of a terrorist group.
felt a terrible sacrilege had been committed against their religion," Bellows said.
But Bagri's lawyers contend the luggage containing the bomb joined the flight in Toronto.
Bagri's political motivation appears more concrete.
Defence lawyers maintain their clients are innocent and prosecution witnesses were either lying or delusional.
OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS.)
"It has been shown (Malik) has a powerful and pervasive motive," prosecutor Joe Bellows said in British Columbia Supreme Court.
Malik and Bagri, who have been in custody since their arrest in late 2000, are also charged in connection with a blast on the same June day that killed two baggage handlers at Tokyo's Narita Airport.
The prosecution team will spend the next three weeks finalizing their case before Justice Ian Bruce Josephson.
Another prosecution witness, a man who was a member of a Sikh militant group in New York, testified that Bagri as much as confessed to him outside a New Jersey gas station.
"Bagri is exhorting the crowd to take revenge on the Indian government and Hindus," Cairns said.
(BEGIN OPTIONAL TRIM.)
Nobody, nobody can do anything."
"There are more people involved than the two people who are charged," said Dave Hayer, an British Columbia provincial legislator.
We're tired."
"Many people are not willing to talk, theyre still afraid," Hayer said.
Bagri's lawyer says his client was the innocent victim in the case.
British Columbia Supreme Court Justice Ian Josephson announced Friday he will deliver a decision on March 16, 2005.
"I am so tired, but we need the answers," said Madon.
Prosecution spokesperson Geoffrey Gaul said 113 witnesses testified for the government and for Bagri and Malik's defence teams.
The agent testified that the woman said that Bagri implied that wrongdoing would be done, but, during the trial, she said she did not remember making such statements.
On that day a suitcase bomb exploded at Japan's Narita airport, killing two Japanese baggage handlers as they transferred it to an Air India jet.
That's what he wants."
More than 100 witnesses have testified during nearly two years of proceedings in the most serious terrorism trial in Canadian history.
The judge must also decide between the conflicting testimony of two bombing experts who testified earlier this year.
Bellows was expected to continue his closing arguments on Tuesday, and the case is likely to go to the judge for a verdict in mid-December.
The prosecution began final arguments Monday in the case of an Air India jumbo jet bombing that killing 329 people almost 20 years ago, saying the two men accused in the Canadian trial were guilty beyond a reasonable doubt.
Neither Malik nor Bagri chose to testify.
The first woman to testify once worked for Malik and says the pair were in love.
In 2003, he also pled guilty to manslaughter in the Flight 182 bombing.
Bellows said Malik wanted to teach the Indian government a lesson as Sikhs fought for the creation of an independent Sikh homeland, Khalistan, in India's Punjab state.
The alleged mastermind of the plot, Tarwinder Singh Parma, died in a 1992 police shootout in India.
Bagri allegedly made the comment following a speech he gave at New York's Madison Square Gardens.
The key prosecution witness against Malik is a former employee at a religious school that Malik directed.
Ripudaman Singh Malik, a 57-year-old millionaire, and Ajaib Singh Bagri, 55, are charged with planting bombs that exploded June 23, 1985, aboard Flight 182, killing 329 people, and 53 minutes earlier at Tokyo's Narita Airport, killing two baggage handlers.
"There is no doubt these people were murdered," said Wright, adding that the only explanation for the bombing was "political and religious zealotry."
While the defense maintains there is no evidence Malik was interested in Indian politics, Bagri's political motivation appeared more concrete.
If Judge Ian Josephson accepts that defense, Bagri may be acquitted.
That attack sparked a cascade of violence and revenge killings that included the assassination of Prime Minister Indira Gandhi.
A special high-security courtroom was built for the case, at a cost of $6 million, complete with a prisoner dock encased in bulletproof glass.
A verdict in the trial which began in April 2003 isn't expected until early 2005.
Canadian prosecutors began wrapping up their final arguements here Monday in the trial of two Sikh immigrants from India charged with conspiring to bomb Air India passenger jets in 1985, resulting in the deaths of 331 people.
So far, only Inderjit Singh Reyat, an immigrant to Canada, has been punished for the 1985 terrorism.
Much of the case, however, hinges on the position of the bomb on flight 182, which originated in Vancouver.
The prosecution said the accused were zealots driven by a desire to create an independent Sikh state of Khalistan in the Punjab region of northern India and wanted to teach the Indian government a lesson.
Parmar died in a shootout with Indian police in 1992.
Parmar died in a shootout with Indian police in 1992.
"They ignited in Malik emotions of both ambition and revenge," he said.
The defense lawyer for Malik, David Crossin, called the case a "logistical nightmare" and said, "I don't think there will ever be such a case like this again, in this country, or perhaps the world."
Hundreds died in the attack.
Malik and Bagri, who have been in custody since their arrest in late 2000, are also charged with the Narita blast.
Two bombs blew up on June 23, 1985, with the first killing two baggage handlers at Japan's Narita airport as they transferred baggage to an Air India plane.
In both disasters, critics blamed lax airport and airline security.
Prosecutors maintain that Talwinder Singh Parmar, founder of the militant Babbar Khalsa Sikh militant group, was the mastermind behind the bombings.
The prosecution alleges the motive was revenge against the Indian government's 1984 attack against separatists who had taken refuge in the Golden Temple of Amritsar, Sikhism's holiest shrine.
"All Sikhs ... felt a terrible sacrilege had been committed against their religion," prosecutor Joe Bellows said during closing arguments.
By the time Justice Ian Bruce Josephson of the British Columbia Supreme Court renders a decision on Malik and Bagri, the Air India case will be nearly 20 years old.
The case in British Columbia Supreme Court has stretched for 13 months since hearings began in April 2003.
The two are also charged with conspiring in an explosion that killed two baggage handlers at Narita airport outside Tokyo 54 minutes before Flight 182 went down.
The pair is accused of taking part in a plot by Sikh fundamentalists to build two bombs and plant them on two flights leaving Vancouver that connected with Air India flights to London and Delhi.
Prosecutors were also held back by numerous errors made by investigators.
But most of the prosecution's case is based on supposed confessions Malik and Bagri gave to several associates that they deny making.
Bellows recounted the testimony of one man who said Malik had approached him to carry an attache case containing a time bomb to Vancouver's airport.
"Canada has still not woken up to the reality that global terrorism is still in our back yard."
As Bellows spoke, Malik, dressed in traditional Sikh garb, dozed in the prisoners' box protected by bulletproof glass.
Mysterious deaths have dogged the case from the start.
It is being heard in a US$5 million (euro3.9 million) British Columbia Supreme Court room specifically built for security precautions.
Bagri, who wears a dark turban, is accused of taking luggage with the explosives to the Vancouver airport.
A public inquiry would also investigate how police and intelligence agents handled the Air India case, which was plagued by infighting between agencies and the erasure of evidence.
Answering his own question, Wright told the court that only "political and religious zealotry" could motivate such a crime.
The case has stretched for 13 months since hearings began in April 2003.
In addition, key witnesses offered vague and contradictory recollections, and key evidence is circumstantial.
The alleged mastermind of the plot, Talwinder Singh Parmar, was killed in a police shootout in India in 1992.
Prosecutors say Sikh extremists in Canada built two suitcase bombs, bought airline tickets and checked the suitcase bombs onto Vancouver flights connecting with Air India.
(END OPTIONAL TRIM.)
We're not done yet."
The case is being heard in a US$5 million (euro4 million) courtroom specifically built for security precautions.
Mysterious deaths have dogged the case from the start.
The two Sikh immigrants, Ajaib Singh Bagri and Ripudaman Singh Malik, are each charged with eight counts of murder and conspiracy in the bombing, the deadliest single terrorist act until the September 11, 2001 attacks in the United States.
Prosecutors said Bagri and Malik were religious Sikh fundamentalists who used violence to achieve their political goals.
"Their case collapsed."
Within it is a skeleton of a Boeing 747 Jumbo Jet, named the Kanishka by Air India.
Prosecutors say Malik, who has worn a white tunic at the trial, recruited members of the plot and gave $3,000 to a friend to pick up tickets for the flight with the ultimate aim of planting the bomb on Flight 182.
Cairns also said Bagri made pointed references to Air India, saying the Indian government used proceeds from the airline to purchase weapons to use against Sikhs.
Bagri has also been accused of inciting people at Sikh temples in British Columbia and Ontario, and for calling for the death of then Indian prime minister Indira Gandhi.
She was eventually fired.
Other witnesses allege they have received threats.
Josephson is hearing the complicated trial alone without a jury.
Government prosecutors contend that Malik arranged and paid for the airline tickets used to check the suitcase bombs onto planes, and that Bagri arranged to get the bombs to the airport.
Prosecutor Robin Wright said his team will drive home an arguement that the pair were part of a plot to check two suitcase bombs onto Air India aircraft departing Vancouver.
The prosecution wraps up its case in the next few weeks, and Justice Ian Bruce Josephson is expected to reach a decision early next year.
Closing arguments were expected to start with the defence of Ripudaman Singh Malik, a millionaire businessman in Vancouver.
Bagri has also been accused of inciting people at Sikh temples in British Columbia and Ontario, and for calling for the death of then Indian prime minister Indira Gandhi.
He said that in the speech, Bagri "identifies his targets and he advocates revenge."
The identity of both women, as with many other witnesses in the case, is shielded under a publication ban.
More than 32 lawyers are working on the case believed to have cost more than US$80 million (euro64 million) since hearings began in April 2003.
The attack also led to the 1984 assassination of Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi by her Sikh bodyguards.
The defense concluded its case last month.
Defense lawyer David Crossin argued two weeks ago that one witness was a former disgruntled employee, another was paid $US365,000 (euro285,000) by the government to testify and the third denied evidence on the stand she had given to investigators years ago.
There is no doubt these people were murdered," Wright said.
Justice Ian Bruce Josephson, who heard the case without a jury, will rule on March 16.
"It's been 20 years, for God's sake.
But as prosecutors began their final arguments Monday to convict two Canadian Sikh activists accused of plotting the bombing, the outcome of the trial is far from settled because of years of bungled police work and the unexplained killings of an important witness and suspect.
The motive in targetting the Indian planes, said Gaul, was to fight for the cause of an independent Sikh homeland, to be called Khalistan, and avenge India's 1984 attack on the Sikh Golden Temple at Amritsar.
Air India flight 182, a Boeing 747 named The Emperor Kanishka for the Indian ruler at the time of Christ, blew up off the Irish coast on June 23, 1985, killing all aboard.
He told Judge Ian Josephson that the Indian government's 1984 attack on the Golden Temple in Amritsar, Sikhism's holiest shrine, was a pivotal event in Malik's desire for revenge.
She was assassinated in 1984.
Two fiery speeches delivered to Sikh groups in the early 1980s show Ajaib Singh Bagri had a motive to plant bombs on Air India jets killing 331 people, a prosecutor said in closing arguments Monday.
At the time, Sikh separatists were fighting for an independent homeland in India's Punjab.
On June 23, 1985, the first bomb killed two baggage handlers at Japan's Narita airport, as they transferred it to Air India Flight 201.
More than 32 lawyers are working on the case, which is believed to have cost more than US$80 million (euro64 million).
She was assassinated in 1984.
Malik's legal team said their client is innocent and accused the witnesses against him of being motivated by a desire for revenge.
He was killed later that year in another shooting.
He is serving two sentences totalling 15 years.
The two bombs originated here in the city of Vancouver," Wright said.
Crossin said the prosecution's case "stands or falls on the evidence of this woman."
The investigation into more suspects continues, he said.
"Malik and his co-conspirators chose to destroy not one but two Air India planes.
His identity is also protected by the court.
Two men charged with murder and conspiracy in the Air India bombings, the world's most lethal terror strike prior to September 11, 2001, will wait until March to hear a verdict, a judge said Friday.
Air India Flight 182, a Boeing 747 on its way from Toronto to India via London, blew up off the Irish coast on June 23, 1985, killing all aboard.
Air India Flight 182, a Boeing 747 on its way from Toronto to India via London, blew up off the Irish coast on June 23, 1985, killing all aboard.
No one has been charged with the murder.
She and her son, Eddie, have attended the trial regularly.
She testified that he told her in 1996 and 1997, while they were involved in a strong personal, but platonic relationship, that he helped organize the conspiracy and detailed his role in arranging for the purchase and pickup of airline tickets that were used to check in the baggage with the explosives.
The judge is expected to reserve his ruling in the case, possibly for several months.
Nearly 20 years will have elapsed by the time Josephson rules on the guilt of the two men, who emigrated to Canada from Punjab.
"Revenge, revenge, revenge.
Bellows recalled, quoting from the witness' testimony of what Malik told him.
With the trial of Bagri and Malik now over, it's past time for an inquiry into the bombings, said Perviz Madon, whose husband Sam, a college professor, died aboard Air India on June 23, 1985.
More than 32 lawyers are working on the case, which is believed to have cost more than $US80 million (euro62 million).
Bellows, however, said the Crown witness was highly credible and that the case against Malik "is proven on her evidence alone."
"The witnesses weren't credible," said Malik's lawyer David Crossin.
Bagri and Malik, who were arrested in 2000, are each charged with eight counts related to two bombings on June 23, 1985.
Prosecutors said both bombs were placed on Air India aircraft in Vancouver.
"To Malik, the death of a child means nothing, the death of 329 people means nothing.
"'We have stuff that can blow like, like a (city) block," Cairns said, repeating the witnesses' testimony of what Bagri told him.
"Let's just hope the wait will be worth it."
Lawyers were set to begin crucial final arguments Tuesday in the case of two Sikh immigrants from India accused of the 1985 mid-air bombing of an Air India plane which left 329 people dead.
But the defense argued Tuesday there is no evidence Malik was at all interested in Indian politics.
Bellows showed the court a Canadian intelligence photograph of Malik outside Parmar's home five days before the bombings.
The trial was held behind bullet-resistant glass in a specially-built, secure, 7.5-million-dollar (6.3 million US) underground courtroom.
Aging relatives of the victims came from as far away as Sri Lanka to watch from the court gallery.
What matters is Khalistan."
That witness, a member of a militant Sikh group whose identity is protected by the court, said Bagri told him that he was responsible for the bombings.
Earlier calls for an official probe were stymied by the criminal investigation, and eventual trial of Ajaib Singh Bagri and Ripudaman Singh Malik.
Defense lawyers also contended that he had substantial dealings with the state bank of India, which militant Sikhs would have boycotted.
The woman is in a government witness protection program and a court order bars the publication of her name.
The defense has tried to discredit Malik's alleged confession of his involvement in the bombings to an intimate female friend whose name is also protected by the court.
"We suggest the nature of that false evidence is profound," he said.
Justice Ian Bruce Josephson, who heard the case without a jury in this western Canadian city, said he will reveal his decision March 16.
He proposed the creation of a Sikh homeland called Khalistan and "spoke of the need for Sikhs to wage a war of independence to exact revenge against the Indian government," according to documents released by the court.
"It's time we had a closure," she said.
The men, Sikhs who immigrated to Canada from India's northern state of Punjab, are each charged with eight counts of murder and conspiracy in what was the world's worst airborne terrorist act before September 11, 2001.
Air India flight 182, a Boeing 747 on its way from Toronto to India via London, blew up off the Irish coast on June 23, 1985, killing all aboard.
Bellows said the 1984 assassination of Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi by her Sikh bodyguards was also part of the reaction to the temple raid.
By court order, the woman, like other key witnesses, cannot be identified.
She wants to see the trial over by the end of the year.
He proposed the creation of a Sikh homeland called Khalistan and "spoke of the need for Sikhs to wage a war of independence to exact revenge against the Indian government", according to documents released by the court.
"I think the waiting is going to be hard," she said of the case going to the judge.
"It was a long haul, I'm glad it's over," Crossin said.
Bagri, a Sikh preacher and rural millworker, and Malik, a millionaire Vancouver businessman, maintained their innocence.
The case has called 115 witnesses since it began in April 2003.
But three years later, Hayer was gunned down outside his home in a Vancouver suburb.
Relatives believe that if the details of the Air India bombings had emerged immediately, global airline practices would have changed before the 1988 bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, in which 270 people died.
He said proof of their guilt ranges from providing financial assistance to a man convicted in the case, attempting to interfere with police investigations and admissions to people they trusted.
With no physical evidence or firsthand testimony linking the accused to the bombing, the outcome of the trial is in doubt.
"We did this," the man, whom the Canadian government paid US$365,000 (euro293,000) to testify, said Bagri told him.
Though separated by long years and thousands of miles, both the 2001 hijackings of four US jets, two of which crashed into New York's World Trade Center, and the 1985 Air India bombings, were allegedly carried out by fundamentalists bent on revenge against a foreign government.
He died in a shootout with Indian police in 1992.
"We feel a deep sense of betrayal on the part of the Canadian government," said Lata Pada, a 56-year-old choreographer from Toronto who lost her husband and two daughters on the flight.
Hayers father, Tara Singh Hayer, publisher of a local Sikh newspaper, was assassinated in 1998 before he could give evidence involving Bagri.
The massive case was the largest and most complex in Canadian history, with 18 months of pre-trial hearings, numerous related court hearings and a 19-month trial involving 113 witnesses and millions of documents.
Their trial ended Friday after sapping millions of dollars from Canadian coffers.
Cairns also noted that another protected witness testified that Bagri asked her if he could borrow her car to take some bags to Vancouver International Airport.
The two accused, immigrants from Punjab, were each charged with eight charges of murder and conspiracy.
The prosecution's case is largely based on the testimony of three witnesses who said the defendants had confessed the crimes to them.
He was convicted in 1991 for providing materials for the bomb at Tokyo's Narita airport.
Two potential witnesses in the case, both Sikh journalists, were assassinated.
Prosecution lawyer Robert Wright on Monday opened final arguments expected to last two weeks, saying the guilt of Bagri and Malik "has been proven beyond a reasonable doubt."
Meanwhile, two potential witnesses were assassinated even before charges were laid.
Earlier this month, defence teams for both accused wrapped up their closing arguments.
.
.
The Air India bombing stood as the worst terror attack in modern history, until it was overtaken by the carnage of the attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon in the United States in 2001.
The trial is being held in a 7.5 million Canadian dollar (5.6 million US) bunker-like, bomb-proof, bullet-resistant court built especially for this case.
One of two men accused in the 1985 Air India bombings that claimed 331 lives was driven by ambition and revenge, a prosecutor told a Canadian court in his closing arguments Monday.
John Ward of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police told reporters that 250 officers have worked on the case since 1985.
A prosecution witness who testified that she had a close personal relationship with Malik, wrote in her diary that he had said: "We had Air India crash.
Crown spokesman Geoffrey Gaul said the trial lasted 202 days total and included 113 witnesses.
Final arguments in the murder trial of two Sikhs charged with the 1985 bombing of an Air India jumbo jet concluded, ending one of the most exhaustive and expensive trials in Canadian history.
The prosecution has shown a video of Bagri giving an incendiary speech at a New York Sikh rally in July 1984 in which he said, "We will not take rest until we kill 50,000 Hindus."
In 1995, Bagri also allegedly confessed his involvement to Tarsem Singh Purewal, publisher of Britain's biggest Punjabi weekly newspaper.
"We still have 12 RCMP officers working on this case.
They later said they had not realized the significance of the tapes.
Some observers believe that even though the trial is over, more details of the case are lurking unseen.
Final arguments are expected to last into December.
Josephson ruled that her prior testimony should be admitted as evidence after the prosecution argued that witnesses were coming under pressure from Sikh activists.
The second woman alleged that Bagri asked to borrow her car about the time the suitcase bombs were delivered to the airport.
He was killed in November 1998 after another shooting.
Tara Singh Hayer, the publisher of a Sikh newspaper in Vancouver, told police in 1995 that he had overheard Bagri admit to his role in the attacks.
Nearly 20 years after their loved ones died in the worst terror strike prior to the September 11 attacks, relatives of 329 people killed in an Air India jet bombing are at last in sight of justice.
He said Malik booked and paid for the tickets while Bagri arranged for bags containing the bombs to be delivered to the airport.
Nearly 20 years after an Air India Boeing 747 from Canada exploded in the air and plunged into waters off the Irish coast, killing all 329 people on board, the trial to finally resolve what happened entered its climactic phase this week.
In 1995, Bagri allegedly confessed his involvement to Tarsem Singh Purewal, a publisher of Britain's biggest Punjabi weekly newspaper who was murdered later that year.
Prosecutors believe Malik and Bagri were part of a conspiracy by British Columbia-based Sikh extremists to take revenge against the Indian government, which owns Air India planes, for attacking a Sikh temple in 1984.
Prosecutors contend Malik and Bagri, with others, planted bombs on Air India jets to punish the Indian government for its 1983 army attack on Sikhdom's most holy place, the Golden Temple at Amritsar.
The government has highlighted statements made by a Canadian Security Intelligence Service agent that a friend of Bagri said he had visited the night before the bombing to ask to borrow her car to drop off some bags at the airport.
Prosecutors believe Malik and Bagri were part of a conspiracy by British Columbia-based Sikh extremists to take revenge against the Indian government, which owns Air India planes, for attacking a Sikh temple in 1984.
The case against Bagri and Malik relies on key witnesses who say the accused confessed details of their involvement, circumstantial evidence, and motives.
The prosecution has noted that Bagri reportedly told The World Sikh Organization in 1984 at Madison Square Garden in New York City: "Until we kill 50,000 Hindus we will not rest."
Two orthodox Sikhs will learn in March whether they will be found guilty of the 1985 outrage.
Meanwhile, the Royal Canadian Mounted Police failed to follow up on crucial evidence for years, apparently because of internal politics.
The bags would be going on the plane, he would not, the woman testified.
In all, 178 family members attended, many coming from around the world to view the trial, said Gaul.
Bagri, a 55-year-old mill worker in Kamloops, British Columbia, and Vancouver millionaire Ripudaman Singh Malik, 57, are charged with multiple counts of conspiracy and first degree murder in the world's worst airline terrorism act before the September 11, 2001, attacks in the United States.
The woman, who testified that she had a close personal relationship with Malik, wrote in her diary that he had said: "We had Air India crash.
Vancouver millionaire Ripudaman Singh Malik, 57, and Kamloops, British Columbia mill worker Ajaib Singh Bagri, 55, are charged with multiple counts of conspiracy and first degree murder in the world's worst airline terrorism act prior to the Sept. 11, 2001 attacks on the United States.
All 329 people on board died.
Prosecutors say both men were part of a group of extremist Sikhs bent on avenging India's attack on the Sikh Golden Temple at Amritsar in 1984.
A month after the temple raid, thousands of Sikhs gathered at Madison Square Garden in New York City where Bagri reportedly told The World Sikh Organization: "Until we kill 50,000 Hindus we will not rest."
"This was a murder plot in which two planes were to explode simultaneously," said Robert H. Wright, the chief prosecutor as he began to sum up his case.
The message to be conveyed was: If we can do this, we can do anything."
A month after the temple raid, thousands of Sikhs gathered at Madison Square Garden in New York City where Bagri reportedly told The World Sikh Organization: "Until we kill 50,000 Hindus we will not rest."
The woman, who testified that she had a close personal relationship with Malik, wrote in her diary that he had said: "We had Air India crash.
She told the court Malik once confided to her, "We had Air India crash."
Vancouver millionaire Ripudaman Singh Malik, 57, and Kamloops, British Columbia, mill worker Ajaib Singh Bagri, 55, are charged with multiple counts of conspiracy and first degree murder in the world's worst airline terrorism act prior to the September 11, 2001, attacks on the United States.
After 19 months of complex hearings, the massive trial of Ajaib Singh Bagri and Ripudaman Singh Malik ended Friday with lawyers on all sides trying to score a few last points.
Air India Trial: http//www.airindiatrial.ca
Bagri's lawyer, Richard Peck, said Friday: "This case has been a trek across a vast expanse of knowledge, experience, and law."
Vancouver millionaire Ripudaman Singh Malik, 57, and Kamloops, British Columbia mill worker Ajaib Singh Bagri, 55, are charged with multiple counts of conspiracy and first-degree murder in the world's worst airline terrorism act prior to the September 11, 2001, attacks on the United States.
(STORY CAN END HERE.
On the Net:
___