Then Baron and the Merck people left the call, freeing the four safety panel members to talk openly about the latest unsettling data.
But the Vioxx withdrawal should inspire some sharper thought about what happens to drugs once they have been approved, and whether the FDA should have the authority to mandate more thorough, ongoing, long-term testing.
The four monitors, along with a Merck statistician were the only ones with full access to information about the trial, including which patients were getting Vioxx and which were getting the placebo.
The study found that high doses of Vioxx, known as rofecoxib, tripled risks of heart attacks and sudden cardiac death.
Graham was lead author on a research project that studied the records of 1.39 million Kaiser Permanente patients, including 40,405 treated with Pfizer's Celebrex and 26,748 treated with Vioxx.
With Vioxx coming off the pharmacy shelves, what is a patient who took that drug for pain supposed to do?
"In light of Merck's withdrawal of Vioxx from the market and other recent news stories examining FDA's review of the safety and efficacy of anti-depressant drug use by children, I am concerned whether FDA has been sufficiently aggressive in monitoring drug safety," Davis wrote.
But FitzGerald and colleagues published two studies in 1999 and another in 2001 suggesting that by selectively blocking one of the two substances called prostaglandins that lead to inflammation, these so-called cox-2 inhibitors were sparing the stomach at the expense of the heart.
And a congressman requested the U.S. Food and Drug Adminstration answer questions about the medications used to treat arthritis, diagnosed in more than 49 million people.
If there is a lesson to be learned from the Vioxx withdrawal, surely it is the need for renewed attention to evidence-based medicine and evidence-based drug prescription as well.
Pfizer said a clinical study involving more than 1,500 patients showed that those who had undergone bypass surgery and had taken Bextra intravenously and orally were at higher risk for heart attacks.
Others within the agency suggested Graham's conclusion was too strongly worded, given the FDA had not added such warnings to Vioxx labels.
But FitzGerald suggested that by selectively blocking one of the two substances called prostaglandins that lead to inflammation, these Cox-2 inhibitors were sparing the stomach at the expense of the heart.
Mosholder's analysis pointed to increased suicidal thoughts and behaviors among children taking antidepressants well before federal advisers pushed for strident warnings on the drugs.
Merck officials said last week its latest research showed an increased risk of heart attack and other cardiovascular complications in patients who took Vioxx for at least 18 months.
But shutting down just the "good" one raises the risk of high blood pressure, hardening of the arteries and clotting, he reports.
"There's a good prostaglandin and a bad prostaglandin as far as the heart is concerned," he explained.
Even as Merck was deciding to withdraw the drug, there were medical experts arguing that it should not.
That included patients for whom older NSAIDs had not controlled pain and patients who have sulfa allergies, of which Celebrex and Bextra can trigger a recurrence, Watson Clinic's Miller said.
The medical journal published their reports Wednesday on the Internet -- more than two weeks ahead of their planned publication to help inform doctors and patients.
"I am concerned whether FDA has been sufficiently aggressive in monitoring drug safety," Davis said.
Vioxx and a similar drug from Pfizer Inc., Celebrex, have been touted as ``super-aspirins'' in numerous TV commercials that have downplayed their known cardiovascular risks.
She also said Merck should be alerted before the findings became public "so they can be prepared for extensive media attention that this will likely provoke."
FitzGerald said the Food and Drug Administration "has a responsibility to provide informed, unbiased information rapidly to advise doctors and their patients as to how to respond to the withdrawal of Vioxx."
The Cox-2 inhibitors cause fewer gastrointestinal side effects, including upset stomach, heartburn and ulcers, than other pain-relieving drugs.
The second article in the medical journal, by Dr. Eric Topol of the Cleveland Clinic, criticizes the FDA for not requiring Merck to do studies investigating heart problems with Vioxx even though hints of danger appeared years ago.
"There's not a simple generic answer," said Dr. Randel Miller, Watson Clinic rheumatologist.
Backed by a $195 million ad campaign, featuring testimonials from former skater Dorothy Hamill and music by the Rascals to appeal to aging baby boomers, Merck had sold Vioxx to more than 20 million Americans since its approval in 1999 and millions more worldwide.
According to studies carried out by the Kaiser Family Foundation and others, the pharmaceutical industry's advertising encourages some people to consult doctors, which is a good thing, particularly for those who may not have known they have, say, high cholesterol or blood pressure.
Far from it, the trial confirmed the predictions of Merck's harshest critics, who had long complained that the New Jersey manufacturer was closing its eyes to Vioxx's problems and improperly pushing a dangerous drug onto consumers with aggressive ads.
The medical journal published two reports on the issue Wednesday on the Internet _ more than two weeks ahead of their planned print publication _ to help inform doctors and patients considering whether to stop using the drugs.
"My stomach was very unsettled," said Martin, a 26-year-old mother in Oradell, N.J.
He called on the FDA to change its advice to patients and doctors to reflect the new safety concerns.
Now their wonder drug was suddenly under a cloud and Merck officials faced a difficult decision about how to handle the catastrophe.
Although the FDA requires drug makers to demonstrate the superiority of their medications to placebos before they can release them, the agency lets drug companies monitor their own products' dangers after they've reached the shelves.
They recommended that Graham's findings either be submitted to a medical journal for a peer review or presented beside an alternative FDA opinion.
When Emily Martin was hospitalized for emergency gallbladder surgery last summer, her doctors found that she had also had acid reflux, causing erosion of her esophagus.
Galson also said that Vioxx safety follow-up was complicated by the fact that it is unethical to give placebos to arthritic patients, because their pain needs treatment.
Most clinical trials include independent safety monitors, and their role is little understood but crucial.
He thought the concerns, however, would result in more conversations between doctors and patients.
When the recall occurred, it came about because of a major clinical study sponsored by Merck that tracked 2,600 patients for almost three years to find out if Vioxx helped prevent colon polyps.
At midday, Kim got the general counsel Frazier on the line and called Raymond Gilmartin, Merck's chairman, president and chief executive.
The FDA could help solve these problems not only by enforcing its own rules but by requiring doctors and hospitals to report ``adverse events'' when patients use drugs.
FDA urged to weigh in
In a prepared statement, the FDA said it "values open discussion and frank exchange about scientific and medical issues" and subjects its scientists to "more rigorous" scrutiny than typical scientific peer reviews.
Momentum was growing for a fresh look at the safety of Celebrex and other pain relievers as key researchers, a congressman and European regulators said they feared such drugs might raise the risk of heart problems like those blamed on the arthritis medicine Vioxx.
After some initial evidence that the drug might be linked to cardiac disease, the FDA required Merck to attach an additional warning (which was justified).
No one is arguing that the drug poses serious health risks, beyond a slight chance of side effects like headaches and flatulence.
``That's the tragedy here.''
Over the past two weeks The Washington Post had interviewed independent researchers who collected and reviewed the Vioxx data, company officials who decided how Merck would respond, critics of the drug industry and regulators who, in the end, played almost no role in its recall.
Topol also criticized the FDA for letting Merck blitz consumers with TV ads pushing the drug.
Patients on Vioxx for arthritis or other conditions should be getting letters from their doctors, although they can call them now.
Instead the FDA strongly supported the Merck decision to use three placebo-controlled trials in healthy people to test whether the drug was protective against prostate and colon cancer and colon polyps and also to study cardiovascular risk.
The FDA needs to give more guidance in using the remaining COX-2 inhibitors, Fitzgerald said in the Journal article.
Critics noted the role that advertising and marketing had played a role in the drug's being widely prescribed to patients who might do just as well with ibuprofen or other inexpensive over-the-counter remedies.
In a separate report released by the New England Journal, Dr. Eric Topol of the Cleveland Clinic chastises the FDA for not requiring Merck to do studies investigating heart problems with Vioxx when hints of them first appeared years ago.
Vioxx, whatever its safety risks, was hardly unique as a prescription drug that became a best seller on the strength of advertising aimed directly at consumers.
The results of that study came on the heels of an earlier study that showed a greater number of heart attacks in patients taking Vioxx, although there were fewer stomach ulcers and bleeding.
FitzGerald also challenged Pfizer's contention that no science shows increased risk from Celebrex.
Neaton immediately called Baron, who was conducting the trial with a grant from Merck, and explained the problem.
Many doctors and patients liked Vioxx's track record on gastrointestinal problems, a major source of worry for arthritis patients.
"But we need to understand that anything strong enough to help you is potentially strong enough to have a side effect."
Since the Merck decision, public health advocates and some congressional leaders have asked pointedly why the FDA, the nation's arbiter of drug safety, did not act sooner itself.
By then, Kim said, he was leaning toward pulling the drug.
"Merck knew it had trouble on its hands and took action.
The Government Accountability Office, an investigative arm of Congress, already has been asked to look into whether the FDA muzzled another staffer who linked antidepressants to raising the odds of children suffering suicidal tendencies.
"The data for Celebrex is robust and exceeds, in the length of patients in studies and in the size of studies, the data Vioxx has," she said.
"The data for Celebrex is robust and exceeds, in the length of patients in studies and in the size of studies, the data Vioxx has," she said.
In testimony before a congressional panel in mid-September, Andrew Mosholder, an FDA epidemiologist, said his bosses asked him to soften recommendations about antidepressants.
"The question for the FDA is whether there should be a general warning, particularly for patients who are at high risk of cardiovascular disease," the doctor said.
Pfizer Inc. warned doctors on Friday that one of its bestselling painkillers, Bextra, might increase the risk of a heart attack or stroke in coronary artery bypass surgery patients.
The company also issued a warning on Friday about an extremely rare and potentially fatal skin reaction to Bextra.
All three trials were placebo-controlled and ``blinded'' to investigators, making them the most trusted kind of drug research.
"After that discussion, it was Dr. Graham's decision to revise the abstract.
For patients on blood thinners such as Coumadin, the combination could be highly risky without proper supervision.
That could have made many less likely to prescribe it.
Merck took the drastic step of pulling Vioxx because its research showed it caused increased risk of heart attack.
"I'm surprised anyone has ever written a prescription for Nexium."
Or were they persuaded to do so by Merck's advertising?
Dr. Ada Lopez-Mendez, a rheumatology specialist at Winter Haven Hospital, said patients should return the Vioxx they have.
So why is Merck recalling the drug now?
He said the drugs remain a "rational choice" for patients at low risk of cardiovascular problems who have had serious gastrointestinal events (such as bleeding), but he said it would "seem prudent" to avoid them with patients who have or are at risk of cardiovascular disease.
Meanwhile, Republican Congressman Tom Davis of Virginia, who chairs the House Government Reform Committee, sent a letter to FDA's acting commissioner, Dr. Lester Crawford, giving him two weeks to answer questions about how FDA tracks problems with drug safety, how it dealt with issues surrounding Vioxx, and whether the agency will study potential risks in similar drugs.
"When there are other alternatives, why risk trying to use the drug that might have elevated risk?"
But the outside experts, most of whom had done previous work with Merck and were offered a fee for their consultation, had surprisingly mixed opinions.
He and other Merck scientists pored over the data, looking for flaws but finding none.
At the same time, instead of acting as a public watchdog, the Food and Drug Administration was busy challenging its own expert and calling his work 'scientific rumor.'"
"As my investigative staff continues looking into how the Food and Drug Administration handles drug safety issues, particularly with antidepressants and Vioxx, a picture is emerging of an agency that can't see the forest for the trees," said Sen. Charles Grassley, R-Iowa, chairman of the Senate's Finance Committee.
An examination of how and why Merck reacted offers an unusual look at how safety issues are handled in clinical trials once a drug is on the market and the complex business of weighing risks against benefits.
In the seven years since the FDA lifted longstanding strictures against such ads, prescription drug advertising has grown into a $3.8 billion-a-year business.
Vioxx and other Cox-2 inhibitors like Celebrex had been promoted as wonder drugs, since they provided pain relief to arthritis sufferers without causing stomach problems, but now Vioxx is off the market and the others are under a cloud.
In addition, in 2003 and earlier this year, they found that more people in the Vioxx group were having cardiovascular events than in the placebo group.
Whatever the company's motives, its decision to withdraw Vioxx should cast scrutiny on at least two problems inherent in the nation's system for assessing and monitoring drug safety.
Pfizer's medical director, Dr. Gail Cawkwell, insisted that its drugs are safe.
Now research lab director Peter Kim and general counsel Kenneth Frazier were flying to Boston to tell one of the men most responsible for Vioxx's success that Merck would be pulling the drug in two days.
Although Bextra is not approved for use for surgery patients, Pfizer said that its studies had shown that general surgery patients -- as opposed to bypass patients -- were not at higher risk for heart attacks.
Merck faces several lawsuits, including a class action filed Thursday alleging the company made false and misleading statements about Vioxx's safety.
E-mail: bhendrickajc.com
Dr. David Graham, associate director for science in the drug safety division of the Food and Drug Administration, by early August had notified his supervisors that a study of Vioxx showed patients on the starting dose had 50 percent greater risk of cardiac arrest than those on competitor Celebrex.
By then, Merck had notified the FDA that it needed an emergency meeting that afternoon, and asked that top officials be present.
Furthermore, Merck's carefully cultivated image would go out the window if Vioxx stayed on the market, he said, because Merck ``prides itself on its ethical approach.
In a separate report also released by the medical journal, Dr. Eric Topol of the Cleveland Clinic chastises the FDA for not requiring Merck to do studies investigating heart problems with Vioxx when hints of them first appeared years ago, and for allowing the company to blitz consumers with TV ads touting the drug.
Rich Tomaselli of Advertising Age Magazine said Merck spent $78 million advertising Vioxx last year, compared to $96 million for Celebrex, the 10th most popular drug in the country.
Scolnick was the one who had thrown Merck's resources behind the creation of Vioxx, a painkiller with fewer gastrointestinal side effects than traditional drugs.
The same team also was monitoring another Merck trial to see if Vioxx might help protect against prostate cancer.
"Neither Merck nor the FDA fulfilled its responsibilities to the public ...
Their doctors can prescribe other Cox-2 inhibitors, or try drugs such as ibuprofen.
Pfizer's medical director, Dr. Gail Cawkwell, insisted that its drugs are safe.
The drugmaker's colon cancer study of 2,600 people was designed to evaluate the effectiveness of the standard 25-milligram dose in preventing a recurrence of colon polyps.
But the U.S. Food and Drug Administration said similar prescription drugs were safe.
Merck, which knew Vioxx was in competition with similar drugs, then conducted further trials, largely to find out if Vioxx could be legitimately recommended for other conditions.
And researchers writing in the New England Journal of Medicine voiced their concerns as well with such drugs as Pfizer's popular Celebrex.
Simply switching to stronger doses of over-the-counter pain medicine is not necessarily the right option, doctors said.
People die every day waiting for new treatments.
Along with the FitzGerald piece, The New England Journal of Medicine also posted a second article on the Internet, two weeks ahead of scheduled publication, signaling a more immediate concern.
Pfizer said it is already conducting research into whether Bextra increases the risk of heart attacks in people taking the drug for chronic pain.
Despite clear beneficiaries like Emily Martin, though, many medical experts say most patients would do just as well with various cheaper, over-the-counter remedies for indigestion and heartburn, including AstraZeneca's own Prilosec -- a chemically similar predecessor that no longer requires a prescription and sells for $40 a month or less.
Some of them have an anti-clotting effect that make patients more likely to bleed.
The FDA's own study of the Vioxx safety issue has become mired in controversy.
In the e-mail, Trontell suggested that Graham defer his presentation in favor of a journal article so dissenting scientists _ including within the FDA _ could comment.
That afternoon, Baron called his contact at Merck to say that the drug presented an unacceptable risk of cardiovascular damage.
They talked first with Merck representatives and the principal investigator for the colon polyp trial, John Baron of Dartmouth Medical School.
Vioxx was easier on the stomach than aspirin, but it cost more.
But Northwestern University rheumatologist Thomas Schnitzer argued for ditching Vioxx entirely because Merck's scientists could not explain why the drug started causing heart attacks after 18 months.
They may review patients' conditions to see if they still need medicine, she and Miller said.
Through this process, Merck discovered that Vioxx did indeed carry a small but unacceptable risk of cardiac problems when used for longer than 18 months.
Gilmartin said he agreed the drug should be pulled but wanted to take a decision of that magnitude to his board of directors who concurred when they met the next day.
FitzGerald led the studies, which were designed by him but funded by the drug companies.
The company was trying to get at cardiovascular risk, he said, by initiating three clinical trials that would together give important new information on the issue.
Yet Merck continued advertising.
An FDA official said the agency would have no immediate comment.
``Look Peter, we're going to make this decision based on what's in the best interest of science and patient safety,'' Gilmartin recalled saying.
The painkillers known as COX-2 inhibitors, which include Bextra and Vioxx, have been widely prescribed to people suffering with arthritis.
"We all take reasonable risks in our lives," the physician said.
"I think it's good we are looking at safety," Wilson said.
The solution is not a total ban on advertising, as some suggest, but rather more clinical trials of drugs, aimed specifically at determining effectiveness as well as long-term safety.
"We've got adequate support for what we say in the ads."
In 2001, the agency formally warned the company against misleading doctors about those risks, and in 2002, the FDA required stiffer wording on the drug label.
Their less-upsetting impact on the stomach was a plus, particularly with older patients.
Merck's decision to withdraw Vioxx cast suspicion on the safety of drugs in that class.
Vioxx is a new-generation painkiller, one of several that are (or were) prescribed instead of aspirin or other over-the-counter drugs.
But U.S. Rep. Tom Davis of Virginia, Republican chairman of the House Government Reform Committee, sent a letter to FDA's acting commissioner, Dr. Lester Crawford, giving him two weeks to answer questions about how FDA tracks problems with drug safety, how it dealt with issues surrounding Vioxx and whether the agency will study potential risks in similar drugs.
The FDA said such discussions are typical before scientific findings are published.
"Dr. Graham described an environment where he was 'ostracized,' 'subjected to veiled threats' and 'intimidation,'" Republican Sen. Chuck Grassley, of Iowa, said in a statement after Finance Committee investigators interviewed the researcher Thursday.
Nexium is typical of the brand-building trend.
"I've gone about as far as I can without compromising my deeply held conclusions about this safety question," Graham replied in an Aug. 13 e-mail.
Call the doctor who prescribed it and talk about alternatives.
Suppressing both, as older painkillers like aspirin and other non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, or NSAIDS do, helps the heart.
"There's a lot of individual variability in medicines," he said.
Writing in the medical journal, Dr. Garret FitzGerald, chief of pharmacology at the University of Pennsylvania, said studies suggest the same mechanism that makes the drugs easier on the stomach than traditional painkillers also blocks a substance that prevents heart problems.
And if courts determine that Merck was negligent, the company will pay a heavy price in compensation.
"I believe this is a class effect," he said, meaning the problem that caused Vioxx to be removed also could apply to Celebrex and Pfizer's newer and similar drug, Bextra.
One can only speculate, but it may have less to do with side effects outweighing benefits than with legal liabilities outweighing profits.
The withdrawal of Vioxx caused Merck's market value to sink by almost $27 billion.
Merck critics, and there are many, say the company had plenty of warning.
When you've been going this long you don't expect this kind of phone call,'' Gilmartin remembered in an interview soon after the drug was pulled.
``Coming to that conclusion, it took our breath way,'' Neaton said.
Sen. Charles Grassley, R-Iowa, who has launched an investigation into the Food and Drug Administration's handling of Vioxx said one of the questions will be whether ``a too cozy relationship between the FDA and drug companies is getting in the way of public safety.''
Twenty-seven million prescriptions have been written for Celebrex since 1999, Caprino said.
"Dr. Graham described an environment where he was 'ostracized,' 'subjected to veiled threats' and 'intimidation,' " Grassley's office said.
But the study was halted when it indicated a heightened risk of cardiovascular complications.
Celebrex and Vioxx have become household names in recent years.
This took nearly a week, during which Baron took precautions to guard against leaks of negative information and insider trading of Merck shares.
EDS: Associated Press writer Linda A. Johnson in Trenton contributed to this report.
Big government payers such as Medicaid or Medicare could pay only for expensive new drugs that are demonstrably superior to older, cheaper ones.
At lunchtime on Monday, Sept. 27, it was time to make a final decision.
The FDA said that Graham decided to revise his abstract conclusion.
The first is misleading ads.
E-mails suggest otherwise.
``The drug held up for three years.
Cleveland Clinic cardiologist Eric Topol, an early critic of the drug, estimates Vioxx may have caused 30,000 to 100,000 heart attacks and strokes, many of them ``preventable'' because patients could have taken other drugs.
And older nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs such as ibuprofen and naproxen, typically called NSAIDs, cause gastrointestinal bleeding in some patients.
Graham responded to his supervisor's suggested revisions in an Aug. 13 e-mail that: "I've gone about as far as I can without compromising my deeply-held conclusions about this safety question.
Dr. David J. Graham, associate director for science in the FDA Drug Center's Office of Drug Safety, told Senate investigators he faced stiff resistance within the regulatory agency to his findings.
Graham told The Associated Press that Grassley's characterization was accurate.
Bill Hendrick writes for The Atlanta Journal-Constitution.
Vioxx was Merck's fourth top seller, and they knew their decision would be extremely harmful to the company.
Graham told Senate investigators that he believed the FDA was trying to block publication of his findings noting the higher risk.
said Lopez-Mendez, medical director of rehabilitation services at Winter Haven Hospital.
Anything that smacked of a cover-up would have strengthened the plaintiffs' hands.
Withdrawal day started early, with a 4 a.m. e-mail to Merck's 60,000 employees alerting them to a major announcement.
Merck & Co. said its surprise decision Thursday to withdraw the arthritis drug Vioxx -- used by about 2 million people worldwide -- was driven by recent evidence that the drug's adverse side effects outweighed any potential benefits.
But, on the phone call, when Kim delivered the new, more damaging results, Gilmartin's choices were bleak.
But while patients need to stop taking Vioxx, local physicians said, it is not always easy to decide on a new course of treatment.
By contrast, Vioxx made $2.5 billion for Merck last year.
Long-term studies on Bextra, which was approved by the FDA in 2001, are not yet available.
When Merck voluntarily withdrew Vioxx, FDA officials said heart problems were unique to that drug and that the mechanism underlying them wasn't known.
A look at the full data "reveals signs of increased cardiovascular risk," he writes.
For people too worried about the risks to continue taking prescription medications, he suggested over-the-counter drugs like Tylenol, at least until they have time to consult with their doctor.
The decision was also sound litigation strategy.
The second problem is the nation's almost exclusive reliance on drug companies to police the safety and efficacy of their own drugs.
The research team's original conclusion said that high doses of Vioxx should not be prescribed or used.
Although the U.S. Food and Drug Administration said the risk of an individual patient having a heart attack or stroke related to Vioxx is small, the agency also said "there appear to be significant safety concerns."
A senior Republican senator who released the e-mails said the case was another example of a pattern by the FDA.
With Vioxx, researchers had been warning about the drug's possible cardiovascular risks since 2000, only a year after it was approved by the FDA.
In his view, the new Vioxx data quantified the risk and made it manageable.
Galson said that his agency met often with Merck to discuss earlier troubling Vioxx studies, and said that ``we insisted that we needed more information about the cardiovascular risks.''
Vioxx was approved after trials held under the auspices of the Food and Drug Administration showed it to be effective (which it was).
When the agency determines a drug company has made a misleading ad, it first issues a warning letter, then imposes a fine if the ad is not pulled.
It also shows that federal regulators often rely on drug companies to tell them that a product is dangerous.
Another study -- this one released in August on a review of more than 1 million HMO patients -- found a three-fold risk of cardiovascular incidents in patients taking 25 mg or more Vioxx, Lopez-Mendez said.
The trial whose results pulled Vioxx off the market was designed to check how well 25 mg of Vioxx did in preventing recurrence of polyps in the colon.
The issue of drug advertising directly aimed at consumers was thrust into the news recently when Merck withdrew its arthritis painkiller Vioxx from the market, citing studies indicating a risk of heart attacks or strokes.
As a result, they alone were in a position to conclude the drug had proven too dangerous for the trial to continue.
Regulators abroad have also indicated plans to review COX-2 drugs.
That is one reason doctors and patients welcomed the new NSAIDs known as Cox-2 inhibitors -- Vioxx, Celebrex and Bextra -- as they started entering the market in the 1990s.
A sizable group were reluctant to give up a painkiller proven to have fewer gastrointestinal side effects than others and were not convinced the available alternatives were any safer, participants said.
"Most people want a pill to make them better," he said.
Bextra is the company's new and faster-acting version of Celebrex.
The last days of Vioxx began with FedEx deliveries on Sept. 14.
``I looked at it and concurred immediately that the trial should stop,'' Baron said.
Vioxx was the largest prescription drug withdrawal in history, "but had the many warning signs along the way been heeded, such a debacle could have been prevented," Topol wrote.
The company was already facing two class action lawsuits alleging patient harm from Vioxx.
And the FDA says that, despite the controversy accompanying the withdrawal of Vioxx, it has no plans to place new curbs on such ads.
Extensive and lengthy pre-approval testing of the sort that would have kept Vioxx -- and all other drugs -- under examination for years ultimately would have harmed more patients than it would have helped.
A "picture is emerging of an agency that can't see the forest for the trees," Grassley said.
"I think the recommendation about high dose rofecoxib is unnecessary and particularly problematic since FDA funded this study and David's travel to France to present it," Anne E. Trontell, deputy director of the FDA's Office of Drug Safety, wrote in an Aug. 12 e-mail.
``We undertook right away to ask the right questions.''
He led the studies, which were designed by him but funded by the drug companies.
``This morning Merck is announcing a voluntary worldwide withdrawal of Vioxx,'' Gilmartin began.
Galson has said, however, that he only saw a short abstract of the study and so could not act on its conclusions, a contention that Graham disputes.
that was a major factor in increasing sales, he said.
When Merck voluntarily pulled Vioxx from the market on Sept. 30, the GAO was asked to roll the FDA's handling of that controversy into its inquiry.
The original report from one study involving Celebrex found no increased risk of heart problems, but it covered only six months of a year-long study, according to the cardiologist.
I couldn't see Merck saying we're going to market a drug with a safety problem.''
Over the next three days, Kim and his researchers convened three teleconferences with about 15 outside medical experts to get their advice.
``I thought the risk was going to be larger than it was,'' he said.
Concern about possible cardiovascular problems associated with Vioxx, however, soon arose.
(On Friday, Pfizer Inc. issued a warning that its Cox-2 drug Bextra may increase cardiovascular risk for some patients.)
Such commercials show how far the Food and Drug Administration has slipped in enforcing its own rules.
The medical journal will publish the new reports in its Oct. 21 print edition.
Celebrex is the 10th most popular drug in the United States, with annual sales of $2.7 billion, up 5 percent in a year, according to IMS Health, a company that tracks drug industry trends.
I believe there should be a full Congressional review of this case."
Pfizer said both Celebrex and Bextra will remain on the market and that there's no reason they shouldn't.
But the data was not definitive, and Merck, which even critics say is one of the most responsible drug companies, repeatedly reassured the medical and financial communities that Vioxx was safe.
From the beginning of the colon polyp study, the safety monitors had noted an increased rate of hypertension among the Vioxx group.
"I'm trying to prompt guidance from an unbiased source, and it should come urgently."
Seven weeks before Merck & Co. pulled the arthritis drug Vioxx off the market because of safety concerns, federal drug regulators downplayed the significance of scientific findings citing the increased risks, documents released Thursday show.
The FDA said last week after Vioxx was withdrawn that the problems were unique to that drug.
She called FitzGerald's contention "an interesting theory," but said, "there is no evidence" of increased risk of heart problems among the 75 million Americans who have taken Celebrex.
Did the 20 million Americans who used the drug since its launch in 1999 really have to spend that extra money and, as it turns out, incur a slight extra risk?
But ads also persuade people to spend money on unnecessary drugs, which is a bad thing for their health and for insurance premiums.
He did so voluntarily."
An initial study last year raised similar concerns in the same kinds of patients.
For five days Merck had been struggling with what to do with frightening new data that showed that long-term use of their $2.5 billion arthritis drug Vioxx doubled the risk of heart attacks and strokes, confirming concerns raised by earlier studies.
On its own, this incident does not make a good argument for more stringent FDA approval procedures.
... You have to have data that the scientific community will accept.''
The FDA Center for Drug Evaluation and Research director Steven Galson said there was discussion of keeping the drug for short-term use, but the company did not think it was practical.
"But there are other things they can learn that are nonpharmacological."
"He did so voluntarily," the agency said.
So far, he said, that information has come almost entirely from Merck and Celebrex.
She called FitzGerald's contention "an interesting theory," but said, "there is no evidence" of increased risk of heart problems among the 75 million Americans who have taken Celebrex.
Kim, Frazier and Gilmartin gathered in the chief executive's conference room at the Whitehouse Station, N.J., campus.
"Nexium is no more effective than Prilosec," said Dr. Sharon Levine, an executive with Kaiser Permanente, the United States' largest health maintenance organization.
After the presentation in France, Graham discussed the issue with his supervisor, the statement said.
``The curves show not even a hint of a detrimental effect for 18 months,'' and even after that the risks did not appear that large.
Fearful of a leak, Merck officials waited until the next day, Wednesday, to tell international affiliates of the planned withdrawal and asked them to hold off on telling their regulators until the news was made public.
The FDA said it followed its standard review process.
Long-term studies are not yet available on Bextra, approved in 2001.
``We did the right things based on what we knew at the time,'' he said.
He said he sees no reason for people using Celebrex to stop.
So she asked her doctor for Nexium, the "purple pill" that is the nation's most widely advertised prescription drug.
Pfizer says there is no evidence that its drugs have problems similar to Vioxx because they are chemically different.
In a certain sense, Merck & Co.'s decision to cease selling Vioxx, its best-selling painkiller, demonstrates how the peculiarly American combination of government regulation and private-sector competition can, serendipitously, sometimes work well.
But he said that the results were ignored and that the FDA made efforts to silence him.
Merck removed Vioxx from sale Sept. 28 after seeing an increased risk of "serious cardiovascular events," the FDA said, including heart attacks and strokes.
In the meeting, top FDA officials were shown preliminary slides from the colon polyp study and were told by Merck that the drug would be withdrawn.
The whole saga, industry experts said, raises unsettling questions about aggressive consumer marketing of drugs before their long-term safety has been proven.
Less than a week after Merck & Co. yanked its popular Vioxx arthritis drug off the market, the New England Journal of Medicine voiced strong concerns Wednesday about the safety of Pfizer's bestselling Celebrex.
Independent studies of Vioxx users continued to add to the questions, and the FDA began its own review.
Though the new study was more comprehensive than past research because it looked at patients over the course of three years, research since November 2000 has suggested that those who take Vioxx face a heart attack risk four to five times greater than those who take older, equally effective arthritis treatments such as ibuprofen and naproxen.
"I did have a patient who said, 'I've heard about Vioxx, I hear Celebrex is next.'
``There was so much denial over there,'' said David Moskowitz, senior pharmaceutical analyst for Friedman, Billings, Ramsey Co.
A third trial was studying the drug's effect on colon cancer was also underway.
But articles released Wednesday by the New England Journal of Medicine say Vioxx may not be the only drug of its type that raises the heart and stroke risk.
Competition combined with regulation forced the drug off the market.
As hundreds of patients' groups can attest, there are high costs when the FDA does not approve drugs quickly, even drugs with serious side effects.
Baron said in the next few days, as he presented the data to company officials and some outside Merck advisers, he experienced ``no pushback at all.''
In addition to Bextra, Pfizer also makes Celebrex, the best-selling COX-2 drug on the market.
AstraZeneca, a British-based company, said that it was unfazed by the critics and that the Vioxx backlash would have no effect on its own consumer advertising for Nexium or other drugs.
That means Vioxx results cannot automatically be extended to Celebrex and Bextra, which are in the Cox-2 classification with Vioxx but are not identical to it.
Despite the criticism directed at his agency, Galson remains unapologetic.
``I was stunned,'' said Kim who had expected positive results.
But then again, he said, ``if an independent committee makes a recommendation like ours, only a fool would tell us to buzz off.''
But the number of warning letters has dropped precipitously since the Bush administration took power, from 82 in 2000 to 24 in 2003.
The FDA's opportunity to act independently on Vioxx ended on Sept. 27, when the fax came from Merck asking for an urgent meeting with senior officials.
He compared it to the FDA last February of not allowing another doctor to present his findings that antidepressants increased the risk of suicidal behavior in children.
"You have one person do extremely well with a drug and on the other it wouldn't work."
Long-term studies are not yet available on Bextra, which was approved in 2001.
As a result, they said, there was no reason to stop the advertising campaign.
``Why didn't they stop the DTC (direct to consumer) marketing?''
FitzGerald said he thinks the problem of increased risk also applies to Pfizer's Celebrex and Bextra.
Grassley's committee is one of three in Congress also scrutinizing the FDA's actions.
Graham presented his findings in France Aug. 25, but already had encountered the resistance from supervisors.
The turbulence outside the aircraft was an echo of the corporate tempest leading up to their trip.
``Running away from your problems, denial, is the worst possible choice,'' said Anthony Sabino, professor of business law at St. John's University.
Last week, Gilmartin and Kim still said that none of the earlier Vioxx studies, by either the company or others, convincingly showed increased heart and stroke risk from the drug.
Neaton and the three safety committee members spent several days studying the data, then held their regularly scheduled phone conference Sept. 17.
He goes on to suggest that Graham rework the study to say "something like 'This and other studies suggest an increased risk of (acute myocardial infarction with (Vioxx) use and should be considered by prescribers when making individual treatment decisions."
Two newer arthritis drugs of the same type are waiting for marketing approval in the United States, but Miller said they will not be released without more review of their cardiovascular risks.
Data from a company study found then that users had four times as many heart attacks and strokes as those who used another painkiller.
"I believe this is a class effect," he said, meaning that the problem also applies to Celebrex and Pfizer's newer, similar drug, Bextra, which remain on the market.
The risk was only slightly greater than average with less than 25 milligrams, she said, adding that the American College of Rheumatology sent members the results of that presentation days before Merck withdrew Vioxx.
Duke University cardiologist Robert Califf argued strenuously on one teleconference for keeping the drug on the market with a much stronger warning label.
Celebrex earned $1.5 billion in the first six months of this year, she said.
Studies done five years ago when Pfizer's Celebrex and Merck & Co.'s Vioxx were approved suggest the same mechanism that inhibits inflammation and makes them easier on the stomach than traditional painkillers also blocks a substance that prevents heart problems, according to Dr. Garret FitzGerald, chairman of pharmacology at the University of Pennsylvania.
That was when the four members of the colon polyp trial's Data and Safety Monitoring Board, an independent panel of specialists hired to catch harmful developments in the trial, received heart attack and stroke data for the previous six months.
But some doctors say this group of drugs may work in a way that increases the risk of heart problems for some patients, and they point to this latest information as additional reason for concern.
He suggested preferential use of Prozac, the only drug approved to treat depressed children and _ according to his review _ the one with the lowest risk.
Even if the painkiller stayed on the market, sales would almost certainly plummet because its advertising would be restricted and would have to carry a ``black box'' warning about the heart attack risks.
The drug was not pulled at that point.
The next day surprised FDA officials learned the drug would be pulled.
Then I gave her the facts," he said.
Studies done five years ago when Celebrex and Merck & Co.'s Vioxx were approved suggest that the same mechanism that inhibits inflammation and makes the drugs easier on the stomach than traditional painkillers also blocks a substance that prevents heart problems, according to Dr. Garret FitzGerald, a University of Pennsylvania cardiologist.
That report is not expected for months.
Information from the earlier study went on the Vioxx label in April 2002, according to the FDA.
The two Merck & Co. executives were somber as the company plane pitched and rolled through the remnants of Hurricane Jeanne on the night of Sept. 28.
Merck lab director Kim heard the news on when he dialed into his voice mail while driving to work, 7:30 a.m. on Sept. 24.
Dr. Paul Seligman, acting director of the FDA's Office of Drug Safety, said the agency did not pressure Mosholder to change his conclusion.
The Food and Drug Administration silenced one of its drug experts who raised safety concerns weeks before Merck & Co. yanked the blockbuster drug Vioxx due to increased risks for heart attack and strokes, the chairman of the Senate Finance Committee said Thursday.
"(And) I offered one of the older anti-inflammatories, and she said, 'I think I'd rather stay on Celebrex.'
``It's not that we're unaware of the consequences, but it's a deep-seated belief that if you do the right thing, rewards will follow,'' he said of the decision to pull the drug.
.
"I saw the commercial and they showed people talking about immediate and miracle relief," she said.
"This represents the largest prescription-drug withdrawal in history, but had the many warning signs along the way been heeded, such a debacle could have been prevented," he said.
.
The FDA's announcement on Sept. 30 did not include the 50 percent higher risk data.
``When I saw the last set of data, I knew we had a tough decision to make,'' said James Neaton, a University of Minnesota biostatistician, who had monitored a dozen other studies but seldom had seen such troubling data.
Gilmartin was clear that the trial should be halted and that the drug might have to be taken off the market.
The announcement comes just two weeks after Merck pulled its painkiller, Vioxx, which is in the same class of drugs as Bextra, from the market because a study showed that the risk of heart attacks doubled for patients who had taken Vioxx for 18 months or longer.
The safety officer who conducted it concluded this summer that the drug posed a serious risk.
Merck launched the effort hoping to create new markets for Vioxx, while also laying to rest questions about the drug's connection to heart attacks and strokes.
to the risk of heart attack or stroke," he said in an interview.
The FDA had no comment Wednesday on the report.
Company spokeswoman Maryann Caprino described FitzGerald's article as "an interesting hypothesis" but said that "in terms of the real world, we totally disagree."
Until the new study, Vioxx seemed the best alternative for some patients despite a caution on its label from an earlier study.
The following editorial appeared in Thursday's Washington Post:
But that wasn't really news.
The FDA's current hands-off approach to drug companies doesn't just endanger consumers, it hurts investors -- who shouldn't be caught by surprise over a drug whose dangers have long been clear.
Results of clinical studies with one drug in a given class do not necessarily apply to other drugs in the same class, the FDA said.
Now Pfizer's warning is sure to fuel the debate about the overall safety of these drugs for all patients.
These studies also were designed to answer questions about cardiovascular risk raised by earlier less conclusive research.
But taking the drug off the market, he said, was the right thing, too.
He had been railing publicly for some time about the absence of long-term cardiovascular risk studies on painkillers, a situation that he said made selecting the right drug a ``total crapshoot.''
The FDA safety officer in charge of the report, David Graham, concluded that Vioxx posed much greater cardiovascular risk than the other major drug in its class, Celebrex.
The controversy grew Friday when Grassley asked Merck, among other things, about an e-mail provided by Graham in which a Merck official complained that the FDA had not lived up to a prior agreement to alert the company before releasing any negative information about its products.
"There's no evidence we're aware of the other Cox-2 drugs have similar effects, but we don't really have studies that are long enough (to know)," Miller said.
The experts agreed unanimously that the trial had to stop.
The lab director's message came in two parts: the experts were divided over whether Merck had to pull Vioxx off the market, but Kim thought they should do it anyway.
Five years ago, FitzGerald published research "revealing a mechanism" in both Vioxx and Celebrex that could "predispose people .
"We're moving forward undeterred," said Jim Coyne, a spokesman for the company.
Dr. W. Hayes Wilson, chief of rheumatology at Piedmont Hospital in Atlanta, urged people taking the drugs not to panic.
As they sat at the former lab director's dining table that night, they watched Edward Scolnick, who had been a champion of the drug before he retired, take in the implications of the data and become ``despondent,'' they said.
Although that study's findings did not cause Vioxx to be withdrawn, Miller and Lopez-Mendez said the results put Vioxx lower on their list for prescribing.
"As a scientific agency, FDA values open discussion and frank exchange about scientific and medical issues," the agency said in a statement.
The national adverse event reporting system that helps the FDA flag dangerous side effects was of little use in this case because the ailments possibly caused by Vioxx -- heart attacks and strokes -- are so common.
But first, Baron needed to get the approval of his steering committee of others involved in the trial.
The conclusion Graham presented in France was revised: "This and other studies cast serious doubt on the safety" of Vioxx doses higher than 25 mg. per day.
Heavily advertised as an arthritis drug, Vioxx was pulled from the market last week after its maker said a study showed it doubled the risk of heart attack and stroke.
Merck & Co. removed Vioxx from use Thursday after new study results showed increased risk of heart attacks and stroke in people who used it for longer than 18 months.
``We were acting totally consistent with the data we had,'' Gilmartin said.
It was not stopped earlier because trial results did not find increased risk in the first 18 months of the trial, the FDA said.
``There was so much at stake for everyone involved.
They were discovered later.
Officials of the Food and Drug Administration said Friday that a meeting about these issues will occur in January.
And an FDA spokeswoman, Crystal Rice, said late last week, "There are no additional changes expected at this time in light of the Vioxx withdrawal."
Raising safety concerns within the agency is "extremely difficult," the 20-year employee said, declining further comment.
He presented that information at a French conference this summer.
FDA: http://www.fda.gov/
This is a safety issue, but also an economic one.
Nonetheless, the agency had agreed with Merck that the 2000 study had too many confounding aspects to be definitive.
On Wednesday, the European Medicines Agency in London announced it would review all drugs of this type.
The numbers were small, in part because people with heart disease had been screened out of the trial, but the trend had been worrisome and the latest data were striking: After 18 months on the drug, the Vioxx group was clearly having more heart problems than the placebo group and the rate of difference was accelerating.
"Over the years, evidence has slowly accumulated consistent with that hypothesis."
Graham planned to present the study Aug. 25, but he immediately hit resistance from his supervisors, who said they were too preliminary.
On Sept. 23 the full committee agreed to halt the trial.
Vioxx, Celebrex and Bextra are the only three drugs in a class known as Cox-2 inhibitors.
It is in the insurance industry's interest, the FDA's interest and the federal government's interest -- because the federal government is a major provider of health insurance -- either to require drug companies to conduct such comparative tests or to set up a neutral agency to do so.
When Neaton faxed him the ``unblinded'' data, the signal was clear: Within the small population of people suffering from cardiovascular disease, the number from the Vioxx group after 18 months of study was twice as high as the placebo group -- 15 heart attacks or strokes per 1,000 patients per year, versus 7.5 for the sugar pill.
Graham, scheduled to present those findings in late August during an epidemiology conference in France, said he ran into resistance when the FDA reviewed his abstract.
His supervisors within the FDA told him to suggest that children use such medications "with caution," Mosholder told the Congressional panel.
Meanwhile, the European Medicines Agency in London announced it would review drugs similar to Vioxx.
On Sept. 30, the company took the dramatic step of withdrawing the drug, sending the price of its stock into a steep slide that wiped out a quarter of the company's value, a slide from which it has not yet recovered.
Graham submitted a revised study to the FDA Sept. 30.
At 9 a.m. on Sept. 30, Gilmartin and Kim took the stage at the Hilton Times Square and faced a room packed with reporters and television cameras.
I've also shared with you the perspectives of my co-authors and I think it's safe to say they share these same conclusions."
FOR MORE INFORMATION:
E-mails released Thursday show John Jenkins, director of the Office of New Drugs, on Aug. 13 said Graham's findings include "pretty strong language."
On Wednesday, the European Medicines Agency in London announced it would review all drugs of this type.
The internal e-mail exchange was released by Grassley.
Three Merck officials sat up all night Wednesday answering e-mails and phone calls from the foreign medical directors.
Wilson at Piedmont Hospital pointed out that there are alternatives to such medicines, like weight loss and exercise prescribed by a therapist.
On the Net:
On the Net:
___
___
___
www.nejm.org
"