If you believe those spaghetti strips could somehow be pieced together, you can spend more for a cross-shredder, which reduces your potentially revealing documents to tiny pieces of paper.
In some cases, a criminal will electronically graft his or her photo onto a legally valid driver's license under another person's name with correct information.
But one thing is sure: The scrutiny of job applicants has intensified in recent years, as incidents of workplace violence, and the number of lawsuits charging employers with negligence in hiring, have increased, employment experts say.
The Iran-Contra affair in the 1980s and a range of scandals in the 1990s drew more attention to shredders.
Thieves normally max out a fraudulent card in less than an hour, leaving the victims to sort out the mess.
``People are more willing to lie and stretch the truth.''
That determines the throat size needed.
Starting on Friday, California will become only the ninth state to prosecute identity theft as a felony.
The Identity Theft and Assumption Deterrence Act of 1998 makes it a felony to commit identity theft.
``There was a warrant for my arrest for check fraud,'' said Young, who lives in Oakland.
The Nixon administration did it.
``These guys are artists,'' said San Francisco Police Inspector Earl Wismer.
His partner in crime, 29-year-old Eric Shay, received a six-year sentence after pleading guilty to 18 fraud counts.
``There are enough horror stories out there about criminal liability that employers feel it's become absolutely necessary.''
... Once they steal an ID, they can use false documents to commit a multitude of white-collar crimes.
The Tres Rios sewage reclamation project, a demonstration project to clean effluent through wetlands.
There was a mountain of confidential data, including information poached from voter rolls, credit applications and a master list of thousands of Florida drivers.
``There's post-traumatic stress disorder that occurs from this crime.
Now, Young always carries copies of letters from the police and credit agencies confirming his identity.
Postal Service inspector who has handled numerous cases identity theft.
While it already is a crime to impersonate someone else for fraud, this law specifically focuses on ID theft.
But some experts in privacy law disagree.
His housemate asked to see Young's Mississippi driver's license photo.
Young's housemate was finally arrested.
In January, it became a misdemeanor, infrequently prosecuted by most district attorneys' offices in the state.
Just the thought of someone rifling through their garbage is motivation enough for many people to buy shredders.
Similarly, the White House urged Congress to pass pending legislation that would enforce criminal penalties for ``identity theft'' _ stealing someone's Social Security number, credit-card numbers or other identifiers and using them to commit a crime, such as credit-card fraud.
Documented Reference Check, for example, at www.badreferences.com, advertises that it will call an applicant's previous employer, asking for a reference as if the applicant had applied for a job.
``Many of these guys are into drugs and can't get regular jobs.
``It's a wound that never gets to heal.''
Most of the identification cards listed people whose names were ``borrowed'' to commit crimes.
``They even had a postal uniform.''
She shreds the name and address labels that she tears off envelopes and catalogs, along with credit card receipts and credit card applications.
The check turned up arrest records for criminal prostitution and drug possession, but those records were incorrect.
Last week, the American Bankers Association launched a radio campaign to warn seniors about this crime.
Frank, who suggests people shred discarded mail, said some criminals find personal identity information in a trash bin.
She was given a copy of the report, as required by the Fair Credit Reporting Act, so she disputed the errors, which were corrected.
Darby is among thousands of Americans confronted with identity thefts.
The bill had cleared the Senate unanimously and the House by a voice vote.
Kelly says he was the victim of identity theft.
The changes in the law also make it easier for job applicants to correct any errors found.
``But it tends to be the impression many employees have.
The woman set up a series of fraudulent lines of credit, ordering credit cards, starting checking accounts and having Frank's mail sent to a different address.
IRS says it has no evidence such a crime has occurred.
More employers are doing background checks on job applicants because more courts are finding employers liable for not only the actions of employees, but also of former employees.
The police said Santner had masterminded the biggest identity theft scam ever seen in San Francisco, with a ring of thieves who took names and Social Security numbers of other people and then created fraudulent paper trails.
Last week, a couple masquerading as her company's business associates passed phony corporate checks with her husband's forged signature in laser printing.
``Personal information on IRS computers is at risk to unauthorized disclosure, destruction or modification, and most alarmingly, to identity theft,'' Thompson said Tuesday.
For example, Gore said he wanted to discourage ``profiling'' _ the practice by some companies of building dossiers on the activities of private citizens using a variety of databases and then using or selling that information to other businesses.
More public records have been placed on the Internet in recent years as information brokers have linked with public agencies, governments and businesses for computer access that enables them to compile virtual dossiers on anyone, including data like Social Security numbers, property ownership, driving records and nearest relatives.
``Ten years ago, you had to hire a gumshoe to find out about a person's background,'' said Beth Givens, director of the Privacy Rights Clearinghouse, a nonprofit advocacy organization in San Diego.
SAN FRANCISCO _ John Santner likes to collect names.
Of the nearly 300,000 screenings conducted by the association each year, fewer than 2 percent return ``hits'' _ findings that flag the applications as needing further checking _ and 1 percent of the hits turn up applicants with reports on file of criminal offenses, Ms. Lucas said.
Penalties will include prison sentences of up to three years and fines up to $10,000.
But in substance this leaves a lot wanting.''
``It was so ridiculous, it was laughable,'' she said.
Lawrence said, ``Employers are frustrated because they can't always get the specific information they need to make a hiring decision.''
--The new IRS system aimed at catching employees who illegally ``browse'' through taxpayer files is working on only one of several computer systems, and it cannot detect which activities are legitimate and which are not.
``What do you do with it?
Thirty-three states now require criminal background checks for workers in positions like health care, child care, schools and housekeeping.
But an identity thief doesn't need to be a master hacker to get sensitive information.
The concern over such mistakes in employment records has spawned a cottage industry of do-your-own-search services that, for a fee, will scout out the data available about you from public records and references.
She didn't.
A 1994 survey of 589 members of the American Management Association in New York found that 70 percent conducted background checks on applicants and 48 percent searched criminal records.
``They mastered every aspect of this crime,'' Wismer said.
``I think it's an outrage, and I think it's a particular outrage when they do it to non-controversial, bipartisan legislation concerning the fastest growing crime in America, which causes its victims financial ruin and great emotional distress,'' Shadegg said.
He recommends that you try to keep private any information like names, addresses, Social Security numbers, dates of birth, mothers' maiden names and driver's license numbers.
The police said the suspects had stolen ID cards and checks, altered them with state-of-the-art desktop publishing equipment and reprinted the bogus cards on a color printer.
The con artist can then make thousands of dollars in fraudulent purchases and have it all billed to an unwitting victim.
She'd been scammed.
The machine works noticeably hard to make its confetti.
An employee at another check-cashing business got suspicious and telephoned Darby.
While shredders can help prevent the theft of personal information from garbage, professional thieves often steal things like credit card applications in the mail.
Evan Hendricks, editor of Privacy Times, a newsletter based in Washington, said shredding documents was smart because ``identity theft is a growing problem to the extent of becoming a national epidemic.''
They just go back to what they know best.''
Garcetti said the law will give his prosecutors the ammunition they need to fight identity theft.
LOS ANGELES _ Sandy Darby is furious.
Employers do background checks in various ways _ using the telephone, fax or Internet, for example.
They broke into mailboxes on the street and in apartment complexes.
The victim sued Flor-Shin, saying it had known that the worker had a criminal history.
The buyers of small shredders include schools, people working at home and professionals like lawyers, doctors and tax preparers.
People need somebody to talk to.
``Over the years, the incidence of resume distortion has continued to creep up,'' said Andler, who is the author of ``The Complete Reference Checking Handbook'' (Amacom, 1998).
The checks bore her company's name and even sported a counterfeit Bank of America logo, sans address.
Calling privacy in the age of electronic commerce ``a basic American value'' that ``must be protected,'' Vice President Al Gore made public a list of a dozen or so new initiatives that seek to tighten the security of financial and medical records and to protect the privacy of children who use the Internet.
WASHINGTON (AP) -- Although the IRS is making some progress, a new audit says chronic computer system weaknesses continue to place sensitive taxpayer data at risk of theft, fraud and even misuse by hackers.
Prosecutors said Frank was the victim of the fastest-growing crime in America: identity theft.
But checking applicants' records is quickly becoming routine for many companies.
But while the proposals were ambitious, the administration can enforce few of them without the consent of Congress or private industry.
Since Strong was victimized, there have been thousands of others, often without any knowledge they are victims.
``The same people in yesteryear who may have gone guns blazing into a bank are now doing identity theft,'' said Alison Koch, an investigator with the California Department of Motor Vehicles who specializes in identification fraud.
I'd never even been to Sacramento.''
The company uses one of several corporate names when making such inquiries.
After Frank found out about the crime, the Laguna Niguel, Calif., lawyer spent hundreds of hours talking on the phone and writing letters before her record was clean.
``Protecting taxpayer information and the systems used to deliver services to taxpayers are key to the success of a customer-focused IRS.''
Once the shredder sticks, you have to use the reverse and forward buttons to free the paper.
The impostor, Tracy Lloyd, eventually pleaded guilty to six counts of felony fraud but spent no time behind bars, Frank said.
``I found out more than I ever wanted to know about this.''
Technology, of course, has spawned an increase in the number of databases containing background information and has made such information available faster.
The Secret Service estimates that identity theft cost U.S. citizens $750 million last year, up from $450 million in 1996.
``This woman stalked me.
They searched Internet databases for personal information on potential victims.
Luckily for her, Darby won't have to pay the money lost on the forged checks.
When the police raided Santner's office last October, officers found extensive records on potential targets along with computers, scanners and a huge amount of equipment.
For example, people can steal preapproved credit card solicitations in the mail, dive behind dumpsters of office buildings to get corporate documents, or access family Web pages on the Internet to get personal data.
Experts in privacy regulation found few new ideas in the White House initiative.
But while Kelly had a hard time countering erroneous information that came up in background checks in the early 1990s, people applying for jobs can easily find out now if inaccurate negative information is keeping them from employment, and they can take steps to correct any errors.
``But it was no joke.''
Some tapes and disks are not overwritten before being used again, allowing unauthorized access to some of this information, including Social Security numbers.
...
Identity theft is a crime that evolves with every advance in technology.
Westin said background checks were most likely to hurt applicants' chances unfairly when employers conducted hasty checks using sources that were not reliable, many of them inexpensive checking services offered on the Internet.
Faced with the problem that background checks sometimes turn up inaccurate information, employers have to try to balance their need to screen job applicants with the rights of prospective employees.
The nomination of Jose de Jesus Rivera as U.S. attorney for Arizona.
But instead she used a pen, a computer and the telephone.
Jon Kyl and John McCain and other members of the Arizona delegation wrote to Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott asking that the original deal be restored.
``Identity thefts are overwhelming credit bureaus, postal inspectors and the Secret Service,'' said Ed Mierzwinski, speaking on behalf of the California Public Interest Group.
Until the situation is resolved with INS, Kyl and Kolbe are lobbying for a return to the old crossing-card system.
And if job applicants are turned down because of credit reports, the employer must tell the applicants about that as well as their right to free copies of the reports.
Identity theft wasn't always so well-known, though.
Santner and his accomplices applied for credit cards and loans and set up checking accounts.
``I never knew why I wasn't being hired.
Mari Frank, an Orange County attorney who has worked on cases of identity theft, summed up the odyssey of fraud victims:
``This is killing me,'' said Darby, the owner of a family-run tour business with five employees in suburban Northridge.
``We believe that managing risk and prioritizing corrective actions and resources is the key to making needed and measurable improvements,'' Rossotti said in his response.
It was an efficient, well-run criminal enterprise.''
The licenses helped Santner and five accomplices scam at least $4 million from businesses and mess up the lives of many innocent people with forged checks and fraudulent credit cards.
Sophisticated computer graphic let the duo create bogus driver's licenses from other states.
Most identity fraud starts small, with a few forged checks or purchases on a stolen credit card.
Frank and other experts said that victims of identity theft often become depressed.
``They still have a long way to go,'' said Sen. Fred Thompson, R-Tenn., chairman of the Senate Governmental Affairs Committee.
So did Oliver North.
The Supreme Court ruled in 1988 that the minute garbage is put out to be picked up, it becomes part of the public domain and is no longer private.
The police broke the Santner ring because its leader liked San Francisco too much, said Wismer, who spent more than two years pursuing its leader.
She routinely has to shred by hand or with scissors applications that are two or three inches thick.
Katrina Haines, 27, a resident of Mission Viejo, Calif., found herself doing just that.
They sifted through garbage for credit card receipts and paycheck stubs.
Credit card theft had been the realm of pickpockets for decades.
WASHINGTON _ The Clinton administration announced a new privacy initiative Friday aimed at protecting children and medical patients, among others.
Identity theft accounts for about half of the $1.5 billion in credit card theft in 1995, according to the Secret Service, which monitors the crime.
--Employees without a need to know have the ability to change or delete taxpayer information.
If that doesn't work, you have to unplug it and turn it upside down for a good shake.
They are more likely to take precautions.''
No one tracks it.''
The changes give consumers more protection by requiring an employer to get applicants' permission before getting credit reports or other background checks on them.
``I thought, well, if I've got to tear up envelopes and anything with names and addresses, that's a lot'' to do by hand or with scissors, she said.
``Identity theft is a plague right now,'' said Beth Givens of the Privacy Rights Clearinghouse in San Diego, which tracks the problem nationally.
Two sheets are about as much as it can take before getting stuck.
That was in 1991.
As in Young's case, catching the thief doesn't necessarily stop the crime.
--Too many IRS employees have access to sensitive computing areas, raising the possibility of information theft.
Until a year ago, there was no legal punishment in California for identity theft.
Fear of so-called identity fraud _ said to be the nation's fastest-growing type of consumer fraud _ is reason enough for some people to buy shredders, said Todd W. Henreckson, director of the General Binding Corp.'s Shredmaster division, in Northbrook, Ill.
Many of the other proposals are just that _ ideas that are up to others to implement.
The Wellton-Mohawk water transfer from the federal government to Wellton.
A Democratic senator _ it's unknown who it was _ placed a hold on the popular measure, which for the first time makes identity theft a crime.
In the case, a Kmart employee was accused of rape by an employee of Flor-Shin, the company the retailer had hired to clean floors.
But they found much of their treasure in the trash can.
When employers check applicants' resumes, they find that quite a few are lying.
Frank said her alter ego, who was prosecuted under credit card fraud laws and sentenced to a work furlough program, got the credit information from a computer database that private investigators use.
Fellowes's Powershred PS60 CC, a cross-cutter that costs $159.99, works like a paper tiger, chewing up to seven sheets at a pass.
Santner and Shay participated in nearly every form of identity theft, the police said.
Strong and other victims have testified for legislation to make it easier to clean up credit and get tougher on perpetrators.
The cards were going to be expensive for users, and devising them had become controversial, so the INS began requiring visas issued by the State Department.
She said she was now eligible to reapply to Good Guys.
``A lot of these people don't find out about it until they're getting a house.
In congressional testimony earlier this week, Commerce Secretary William Daley said the administration's new proposals would bring the United States into compliance.
WASHINGTON _ Budget negotiations between the White House and congressional Republicans and end-of-session shenanigans have left a half-dozen measures important to Arizona hanging in legislative limbo.
And it's difficult to catch people.''
According to a recent report by the U.S. General Accounting Office, the Secret Service estimates that $750 million was lost last year from identity theft, up from $450 million in 1996. Credit reporting companies received 523,000 fraud inquiries in 1997, up from 35,000 in 1992.
The most potential for problems will be with smaller employers, not the big guys.''
To be taken off the mailing list for preapproved credit cards, call (888) 5-OPT-OUT.
``Now you don't have to go any farther than your desk _ what you can find out today for typically under $100 is incredible.''
Identity theft, one of the fastest growing crimes in the nation, is a type of fraud in which a criminal takes another's personal information and uses it to apply for credit.
The portable Shredmaster Confidential from GBC, for example, weighs two pounds and costs $24.99.
SAN FRANCISCO _ Marvin Young Jr. got home from work one evening and found a certified letter from the Sacramento police that changed his life.
Despite the best efforts of federal regulators and private businesses, workers can be plagued by black marks mistakenly left on public records if they do not pursue their right to discover and correct errors.
In June, Santner, 33, pleaded guilty to nine counts of fraud and was sentenced to six years in prison.
... By the time they clear their credit, they've missed getting the house,'' said Phil Dito, a fraud inspector with the San Francisco police.
``They made master keys to many of the mailboxes in San Francisco ...'' Wismer said.
Many employers have adopted a policy of giving only basic employment information when asked for references on former employees because they fear lawsuits.
``I'm having trouble explaining who I am _ he took over my life,'' Young said.
Gore announced instead that, for now, the administration would leave industry to regulate itself.
Gore also urged Congress to pass a law that would forbid companies running sites on the World Wide Web to collect information about children under 13 visiting the sites without permission from their parents.
``I just sold my house and I can't buy another one.
The saga of the real Marvin Young and the impostor using his name illustrates the struggle identity-theft victims face in reclaiming their names and restoring their credit.
She has created an ``Identity Theft Survival Kit,'' written a book and pamphlets, and produced computer discs with sample letters to send to banks, creditors and credit reporting agencies.
Repairing the damage can be difficult, time-consuming and frustrating.
In a 1995 Society for Human Resource Management survey of 1,331 human-resource professionals, 92 percent said they spoke to former employers before hiring new employees, 78 percent called references provided by candidates, 61 percent verified educational backgrounds, 42 percent checked driving records, and 25 percent conducted credit checks.
If she had used the .22 Beretta handgun she had in her possession at the time of her arrest to steal that money, she would still be behind bars.
``And here is the message to them: If you don't find a way quickly to effectively regulate your own industry, we will take actions to make you protect the privacy of all Americans.''
She had no idea what identity theft was until 1995, when she received a call from the Bank of New York demanding that Frank pay up on her $11,000 credit card balance.
Less impressive is the GBC 55X cross-cutter, which sells for $99, weighs 12 pounds and is supposedly designed for up to three sheets at a time.
The impostor opened credit lines at dozens of stores in different areas.
But job applicants do have rights, especially under amendments to the Fair Credit Reporting Act that took effect on Sept. 30, 1997, extending the protection of the rules governing credit reports to job applicants.
After spending thousands of dollars, Frank believes she has finally cleared her name with the Bank of New York and other creditors including Thrifty Rental Car, which was threatening to sue her after the impostor trashed a car.
It leaves us on a collision course with the EU.''
The GAO credited the Internal Revenue Service with making some major leaps forward in improving computer security since another critical audit in April 1997.
That's the insidious nature of this _ there's often no way to know for sure.''
``I've been through identity-theft hell and I survived,'' said Frank, 50.
``The public's becoming paranoid _ and not in an unreasonable nature _ about their personal identity,'' he said.
Typically, one identification card will be used to apply for instant credit at as many as a dozen department stores in a week.
Pre-employment screening must be fast, Cornick said.
And so does Carole Harris.
I'd never even stopped there before.''
``It was just like a business.
I sit in front of the television and shred it myself.''
Kyl, along with Rep. Jim Kolbe and other members of the delegation, is also involved in trying to straighten out the border crossing-card issue.
Sens.
Givens said one woman was victimized because her health insurance company uses her Social Security number as her member identification.
Rossotti, whose background in the private sector focused on information systems, said the initial focus has been on larger data processing systems and it is now moving into other areas.
Four co-defendants are at large or awaiting trial.
When errors in records are found, said Deirdre Mulligan, a staff counsel for the Center for Democracy and Technology in Washington, ``the only way to correct records is to go back to the original source of the information.''
Mathiason cautioned, ``Electronic information can be wrong and to rely upon it blindly is unwise.''
_That will help you decide how many sheets you want the machine to handle at once.
``Back in 1988 when it happened (to me), nobody even knew what I was talking about,'' said Elsie Strong of Los Angeles, founder of the support group Victims of Identity Theft.
The bank and retail stores will be paying for it.
More practical for light use is the company's best-selling model, the 40S, which sells for $29.99 and weighs four pounds.
I think she's still driving it,'' Frank said.
It took Mari Frank two years and became an obsession.
I've worked hard and never made a late payment in my life, but this other guy has just messed up everything for me.''
Santner is a chilling example of one of the fastest-growing crimes in the world.
The report had been forwarded by one of the stores to which he had applied _ Robinsons-May _ through its parent company, the May Department Stores, to the Stores Protective Association, a nonprofit group in Simi Valley, Calif., that provides background screening, work histories and loss-prevention programs to about 100 retail chains, manufacturers and other businesses.
DOES IT MATTER WHICH TYPE OF CUT THE SHREDDER MAKES?
A measure to prohibit the use of federal funds to drain or study draining Lake Powell, an idea under review by the Glen Canyon Institute and approved by the Sierra Club.
The impostor became a bad memory.
Eventually, Young settled into a normal life and even bought a house.
They kept very detailed records.
``I had always torn up my charge receipts into pieces before putting them in the wastebasket,'' she said.
While consumers usually aren't charged for the fraud, it does tangle up their credit records, Givens said.
``It's like the wild, wild West out there,'' Hendricks said, ``and to protect your privacy you have to be Jesse James.''
But his problems were far from over.
Others require new congressional action that is, in some cases, uncertain at best.
Stealing a person's identity requires only a Social Security number and one other piece of identifying information, such as a mother's maiden name.
But the administration chose not to offer any broad new ideas for protecting the privacy of adults online, an issue important to many in Congress and to public-interest groups.
But Young is still slogging his way out of the swamp caused by fraudulent bills.
And that has meant a boom for the companies _ especially Web-based services _ that do such searches.
They used an unusual combination of high-tech and low-tech methods to commit their crimes.
Negotiators had worked out a deal to delay for 2{ years a program that would require foreigners to fill out entry and exit forms at the United States' northern and southern borders, a plan that had border businesses fretting that it would create long lines of traffic and interminable delays.
David Sobel, general counsel for the Electronic Privacy Information Center, a private research group based in Washington, said, ``We didn't hear much here that we haven't heard before, and the gaping hole in their policy continues to be Internet privacy'' for adults.
I don't have a credit card with you,''' said Frank, an adjunct professor at the Western State College of Law in Fullerton.
``Every day, charges are being credited to people who have no idea what's really going on.''
It sends the former employee a confidential report, generally for a fee of $87.95.
A skilled thief can take advantage of that system, harvest names, purchase thousands of dollars of merchandise and bill it all to an unwitting victim whose identity has been stolen.
Most of the time you don't know who is doing it, and the perpetrators never get caught.''
``Once these guys find a good name, they pretty much stick to that and keep it going as long as possible,'' said Andrew Wong, a U.S.
For the complex international economy to function efficiently, credit must be easy, and money must move quickly and electronically.
The administration can enforce only a handful of the initiatives proposed Friday, including two that would tighten the security of medical and banking records.
Now, a new breed of high-tech thieves can steal a whole identity and run up charges in the name, sometimes for years, without the victim's knowledge.
``I felt so alone.
But the GAO said ``serious weaknesses'' remain.
``Before children innocently forfeit personal information, parents should have a say,'' the vice president said.
If a check turns up questionable online information, employment lawyers say, it should be corroborated by other sources, like public records.
Groups concerned with privacy rights say mistakes in reporting personal data happen routinely.
``They move fast to stay ahead of local law enforcement,'' said Inspector Phil Dito, who worked the Santner case.
He had 160 them when the police arrested him last October, including Florida driver's licenses with his picture under more than a dozen different names, none of them his own.
Identity theft also became a federal felony this year, punishable by up to 15 years in prison.
Then last fall, she said, she watched an NBC News report on how thieves needed only a name and address to steal a person's identity, using that information to set up fraudulent credit accounts.
``He was quiet until August of 1997, then he went on a rampage,'' Young said.
Much of that type of information is now available on the Internet for as little as $15.
Marvin Young's case began in 1989, shortly after he moved to the San Francisco from Mississippi.
The thief can walk in, get credit with the bogus ID and leave with thousands of dollars in computer equipment, stereo components or jewelry.
``It's there all the time,'' she said.
Congress required the Immigration and Naturalization Service to change border crossing cards _ identification cards used by frequent border crossers _ to make them more fraud-resistant.
Choosing among personal shredders depends upon how you intend to use the machine and, more important, how much security you feel you need.
The police say that as long as credit cards and checks have existed, criminals have used them for fraudulent purposes.
At times, she said, that can be a lengthy process.
He is the acting U.S. attorney.
Santner stayed in the city for two years, even after coming to the attention of investigators in 1995.
HOW OFTEN DO YOU EXPECT TO USE IT?
Shred, that is.
The audit by the congressional General Accounting Office of six IRS facilities, also found that 397 computer tapes containing taxpayer information had been lost.
The impostor ran up about $100,000 worth of bills.
WHAT KIND OF MATERIAL DO YOU WANT TO SHRED?
But she must deal with the headache of clearing up credit reports and changing the account number.
Lawrence, of the Society for Human Resource Management, said: ``Employers can have all that data and still not take away a sense of how a person will perform in the job.''
The biggest drawback, however, is its size and weight _ it weighs 18 pounds.
But before the police could be called, the suspect left.
``It's a lot safer to do this with a computer.
The popularity of personal shredders has increased tremendously in the past few years, said Jean Papagni, a Staples spokeswoman.
Also caught in the legislative crossfire are:
Sobel also said the proposals ``still leave us out of step with Europe.''
``Legal requirements have increased the use of background checks by businesses,'' said Garry G. Mathiason, a senior partner with Littler, Mendelson, Fastiff, Tichy Mathiason, an employment and labor law firm in San Francisco.
Employers can get information within seconds, even during an applicant's interview, said Gary Cornick, president of the company.
Now there are thousands of us.
His housemate requested and received a copy of Young's birth certificate from Mississippi, then used that document to obtain driver's licenses in Young's name in several states.
Ms. Harris enjoys her Royal shredder so much that she bought a shredder for each of her four children, and she plans to take her shredder back home to Harrisburg, Pa., in the fall and use it there for the rest of the year.
A national credit bureau, Trans Union Corp., has seen the number of consumer inquiries and reports to its Fraud Victim Assistance Department jump from 35,235 in 1992 to 522,922 in 1997, according to figures cited by the General Accounting Office.
``It's easier to go after a bank robber who uses a gun than one who does it with paper and plastic.''
``Background checks today are more critical than ever before,'' said Lynda Lucas, president and chief financial officer of the Stores Protective Association.
Kelly's story points to a growing conflict between the rights of employers and employees in an age of quick, easy and inexpensive computer access to public information: how to balance a company's need to know about a person it might hire with the individual's need for privacy.
The person who stole his identity has been arrested several times, the authorities say, but apparently finds Young's name too useful to resist.
Then in 1990, Fellowes Manufacturing, the leading maker of shredders, introduced two desktop versions, which sold for $149 and $199.
The more complicated scheme is total identity assumption, where a thief applies for credit cards, loans, utility accounts and apartments under someone else's name.
After he found out about the shoplifting report, Kelly sued May and the Stores Protective Association in 1995, complaining that May had failed to correct the report in the association's files even after he had discovered it and provided proof of his innocence.
She did not get the job because of the results of a criminal records check in California conducted by the Amherst Group on behalf of Good Guys, she said.
Checks can be done in days or minutes, usually for a cost of $5 to $200.
So did Bronti Kelly, a retail salesman and former military reservist from Temecula, Calif., who couldn't figure out why he was repeatedly turned down in the early 1990s for dozens of sales positions at department stores _ or dismissed within a week if he did manage to secure a job.
There is now a support group called Victims of Identity Theft (310-397-3004).
In an unscientific test, the unit performed nicely on up to three stapled sheets of regular-sized paper, but it slowed when fed four and five sheets.
They share frustration over an economic system that grants credit easily and a criminal justice establishment that puts a low priority on prosecuting fraud.
It wasn't until two years later that Young realized he'd been had.
Few scam artists are as sophisticated as Santner, a former chef with a knack for computers, and Shay, a former employee of the credit reporting agency TRW (now known as Experian) who is familiar with consumer databases.
In the Young case, he could prove that he was at work at a San Francisco bank the day the fraudulent checks were written.
Within a few months, the identity thief had obtained checks, a driver's license and even business cards in Frank's name.
``I've become a reluctant expert,'' Frank said.
``In a day and age where it's hard to find qualified employees, you really don't want to turn people away if there's not a real good reason for doing so,'' said Barry Lawrence, a spokesman for the Society for Human Resource Management in Alexandria, Va.
... Bills in my name were being sent to Ventura (Calif.).
For a long time, only government agencies and corporations could afford them or the space it took to store the shredders, which cost thousands of dollars and took up about six cubic feet apiece.
``We think the trend is up, up, up.''
_Some shredders cut paper in spaghetti-like strips, while others cross-cut to make what resembles confetti.
Tony Storrie, vice president and general manager of the Fellowes Powershred Division in Itasca, Ill., said: ``A lot of retired or elderly people who have a lifetime's worth of documents are also sensitive to the criminal issues.
He was never arrested for the crimes committed in his name.
President Clinton has promised his signature to make it law.
``In this labor market, you have to act quickly or you'll lose applicants to competitors,'' he added.
Perhaps not surprisingly, retired people, like Ms. Harris, seem to be on the leading edge of shredder buying.
Earlier this year, in Oakley vs. Flor-Shin Inc., the Kentucky Court of Appeals ruled that an employer could be held liable for an attack by an employee against a third party.
But Alan F. Westin, a professor emeritus of public law and government at Columbia University and publisher of the Privacy and American Business newsletter, said: ``I don't believe there's any documented place to find out for sure who's relying on the Internet sources and who's not.
And federal bank regulators will strengthen the enforcement of a law that sets limits on how easily banks can share information about their customers and their accounts with related business, such as insurance companies, according to a senior administration official.
The police believe the thieves' favorite pieces of mail were preapproved credit applications, charge card bills, car insurance bills and motor vehicle registration notices, all used as building blocks for false paper trails.
``It cost me my life, really,'' said Kelly, who has since legally changed his name and Social Security number.
The IRS says it has corrected 75 percent of the problems identified in that report.
``We get people's private information, a lot of it,'' she said.
``The police just don't have time to really go after these problems,'' said Joanne Mankiewicz of San Francisco, whose name was used to amass $80,000 in debt.
``We are working with the Federal Trade Commission to issue a new challenge to companies that use information technology to piece together personal profiles of American citizens and then sell those profiles for profit,'' the vice president said.
Officials said increased use of computers, along with the ease of getting a credit card by mail, is responsible for the rise in identity crimes.
The association was found not liable, and May settled out of court in January, paying Kelly $73,680.
It is hard to lift the shredder on and off the wastebasket it comes with.
In 1995, after more than four years, Kelly, now 34, finally discovered the problem: He had been denied employment because of an erroneous shoplifting report circulated to retailers who did background checks on him when he applied for work.
A Ventura County woman had somehow gotten hold of Frank's Social Security number and other personal data.
Other companies began making the machines, and prices some 100,000 shredders were sold in that year in the United States and Canada.
``I'm a small business.''
You also can have your credit report blocked, to be released only when you call in with your personal identification number, Mierzwinski said.
``Lots of these names may not have been used _ yet _ but they were always looking for new victims,'' Wismer said.
Small companies may turn to unreliable pre-employment checking services because they may not know about reputable services or may consider them too expensive, some experts say.
The goal, Gore said, was ``to ensure that account-holders have the chance to give a thumbs-down or a thumbs-up before banks hand out sensitive information about their accounts.''
Since many employers do not disclose what sort of background checks they use, it is hard to know exactly how they conduct them.
Check fraud is one of the banking industry's biggest problems, costing banks about $1 billion a year, said Sonia Barbara, a spokeswoman for the American Bankers Association in Washington.
A new centralized IRS systems office completed a review of what needed to be done at all district offices in December and has now begun examining all other offices.
--Few contingency plans are in place in case of disaster, such as an alternative computer processing site or effective backup electric generators.
The reason is simple: It's so easy to obtain personal information.
The senator reportedly was attempting to pressure other members to approve some judges.
``It's a fight for your credit and your sanity,'' Frank said.
They had another file under the name of a prosecutor who worked their case.
``I am the true, real Mari Frank and it was not very easy to prove that,'' she said.
It takes from six months to several years to fix the record, depending on the severity of the problem, she added.
He was all over _ in Atlanta, Florida, Washington, D.C., and Minnesota.''
Members of the association, founded in 1929, share information about employees.
The Fireman's Fund Insurance Co. subsequently hired him, based on Allstate's recommendation, and he killed three co-workers there.
``I nearly fainted.
``First you get victimized by the bad guy, then you get victimized by the banks that won't believe you, then you get victimized by the credit reporting agencies that won't take off the fraudulent information and then you are victimized by another company that won't give you credit, then you are victimized by government agencies that won't believe you,'' Frank said.
``I said: There must be some mistake.
In July, a new civil law became effective, forcing credit agencies to clear the records of identity-theft victims who can present a police report documenting the fraud.
I spend a fair amount of time destroying these papers.
But Frank, an attorney in Orange County, Calif., turned her ordeal into a service for other victims: She has compiled a guide to help others avoid the same problems.
``I use it every day.''
``It's a year later and I still can't get a drop of credit,'' he said.
``It was technology rape,'' she said.
The next day, a man tried to cash more than $600 in fake checks at a cash-checking business.
In a written response, IRS Commissioner Charles Rossotti said he agreed with many of the conclusions and GAO recommendations, but he insisted that the agency is well on the way to a more complete turnaround.
It's difficult to estimate the actual size of losses incurred by banks and businesses that grant credit, but estimates run up to $4 billion a year, said Beth Givens, director of the Privacy Rights Clearinghouse, a consumer information and advocacy group in San Diego.
--Computer hackers could access IRS data with relative ease because information isn't encrypted before it is transmitted over telephone lines.
Every advance in technology brings new twists from scammers.
They were able to electronically scan driver's licenses and then change the information and drop in their own photographs, Wismer said.
The government's privacy rules are of special concern now because the European Union plans to enforce a new electronic privacy program in October and has threatened to stop doing business with companies in other countries that have looser rules.
Peoplewise, a 10-month-old privately held company (www.people-wise.com) in Hollister, Calif., has developed what it says is technology that allows the first real-time background checks.
The report, which focused chiefly on nursing-home practices, calls for a national registry of workers with criminal backgrounds that would be accessible to employers.
Once a thief gets a credit card in someone else's name, it's party time.
The new law is the latest in a series of recent local and federal guidelines set up to protect Americans from the misappropriation of a name, Social Security number, driver's license or any other form of identification for monetary gain.
``If people don't know that they have the right to request the details of their own report and the ability to dispute it,'' Ms. Haines said, ``they'll never know why they didn't get a job.''
Arizona members heard complaints that obtaining a full visa is inconvenient for many people crossing the border at Nogales or other ports of entry because the nearest State Department facility is miles away, in Hermosillo.
Authorities believe that an employee of the insurance company stole her Social Security number.
The group is a regional affiliate of the United States Mutual Association, an 80-year-old private clearinghouse in Chicago that pools theft case reports from its 10 member groups nationwide _ it currently has about two million such reports _ and operates much like a major credit bureau.
The thieves' take at two major retail stores: $4,000.
Shredders appeal to people like Carol Story, a member of a co-op board on the New York's Upper West Side who plans to ask the board to buy one.
The services available range from large, blue-chip investigation companies to upstart Web sites that offer data at bargain rates.
Slowly.
A Florida Circuit Court in 1995 found the Allstate Insurance Co. liable for failing to disclose the violent history of an employee it had dismissed.
The scam apparently had been going on for at least a year.
``We're trying to integrate a new delivery method for information, but maybe we're just not ready for it.''
The police record, Ms. Haines discovered, belonged to a person with the same name.
The White House said the Department of Health and Human Services would propose a new rule next week to enhance the security of electronic medical records, but offered no details.
They put together folders on all their potential victims, including one containing a department store account statement and a garbage bill belonging to Sen. Dianne Feinstein, D-Calif.
``She even bought a car using my name,'' Frank said.
It is good for shredding ATM and credit card receipts, but a standard sheet of paper must be folded in half before shredding.
Andler estimated that one of every 12 applicants _ even those who are seeking executive-level positions _ will claim to have college degrees they do not have.
But few use Federal Bureau of Investigation records to check potential employees, so workers with criminal convictions can secure new jobs by simply crossing state lines, says a federal report issued Sept. 14 by the federal Health and Human Services Department.
_Junk mail, documents from work, tax information?
Some of the services available are www.knowx.com, which uses the Information America www.informus.com, which primarily conducts direct public-records searches for 1,000 businesses and Advanced Research Inc. (www.advsearch.com), which offers many checking services on a contingency basis (no hits, no charge), and www.digdirt.com, which says it has access to 325 billion records.
``This is not the way the IBMs of the world check up on people,'' Westin said.
The problems have increased with the growth of online background-checking services.
The group's warning: Be careful about giving out personal information such as Social Security numbers and bank account numbers.
But a new law signed by the president last week should help consumers and business victims.
Every day during the summer, Ms. Harris, 65, opens her mail on the sun porch of her summer cottage in Buchanan, N.Y. She sorts it, then shreds what she doesn't need in her $29 Royal Jaws personal shredder, which sits on top of her wastebasket.
The man covertly copied some of Young's personal information, including his Social Security number and date of birth.
To protect personal information, shredders aren't the last line of defense.
``She got a red convertible Mustang in my name.
Often, they'll hit different stores in different cities in the course of a few days.
``In a society where the term `going postal' is routinely coined, I think if you asked most employees, they would want to be assured that the person working next to them wasn't a dangerous criminal.''
Speaking of getting stuck, all the shredders display warnings regarding long hair, jewelry and ties: all candidates for getting caught in the machines.
``There were 60 or 70 accounts in my name that I had to close,'' Young said.
SAN FRANCISCO _ If someone steals your name and runs up lots of bills with it, how do you clear things up?
``No one is tracking what the employer's checking on these Net services,'' Westin said.
Consumers who think they might be victims should contact the nation's main credit bureaus right away: Transunion (800) 680-7289, Equifax (800) 525-6285, and Experian, formerly TRW (888) 397-3742.
From 1991 to 1993, Young worked to clear his name, writing more than 100 letters and checking his credit report regularly.
Most frustrating for Rep. John Shadegg is the hold the Senate placed on his and Kyl's identity-theft bill, which was passed after an Arizona couple spent $15,000 and countless hours trying to restore their good name after a thief destroyed it.
She applied in May for a sales job with Good Guys, an electronics retailer in Brisbane, Calif.
Hendricks agreed, saying: ``This does hardly anything to deal with the coming problem with Europe.
With the long, thin strips, your wastebasket is likely to fill up quickly (a plus if you need packing material).
``In one month, he opened up 40 accounts in my name.
But he noted that making these changes at the agency's more than 1,000 facilities ``cannot be completed in a few years.''
If negative comments are discovered, (justified or not, it says) the company offers to ask the former employer in a letter to stop passing on bad references to prospective employers.
Evan Hendricks, editor of the Privacy Times newsletter, said: ``In form and ceremony, it's a great day.
She drove home from the courthouse in the same red convertible Mustang that she bought with my name.''
About one-third of all resumes have inaccuracies, and 10 percent of those are serious enough to deny employment, estimated Edward C. Andler, owner and president of the Certified Reference Checking Co. in St. Louis, who has provided reference and resume checking for employers since 1987.
Seven years later, he is still fighting to clear his name, stolen by a former housemate.
Chief among the provisions keeping the state's delegation on tenterhooks are two immigration measures that just a few days ago seemed settled: border crossing cards and an entry-exit documentation program.
``There is no easy solution,'' said Norman G. Magnuson, vice president of public affairs for Associated Credit Bureaus, a 642-member trade association in Washington whose members generate 650 million credit reports a year, speaking about the growing reliance on electronic databases.
Rhonda West, a spokeswoman for the May Department Stores in St. Louis, said, ``We regret the difficulties this created for Kelly.''
I realized that there needed to be a group for us.''
After his wallet was stolen, he said, a shoplifter who was arrested used Kelly's name and the Los Angeles County Police Department corroborated his account.
The man who was Young's housemate for a few months in 1989 had stolen his identity and run up debts around the nation, investigators said.
Based on recent sales, manufacturers estimate that 3 million personal shredders will be sold this year in stores like Staples, Office Max, Office Depot, Best Buy, Wal-Mart and Sears, making the machines the fastest-growing home office product.
``I had to write 90 letters and spent 500 hours working to clear my name.''
``Identity theft is the fastest-growing crime in America, maybe even the world,'' Los Angeles County District Attorney Gil Garcetti said at a news conference Wednesday to explain the new law.
Carefully monitor your bank and credit-card accounts to spot any activity that wasn't yours, and contact the bank right away if you find any.
Shredders have been around since the 1930s, and they became part of the public vernacular during the Watergate years in the 1970s.
But in the last-minute haggling this week, negotiators decided the program would be on indefinite hold along the Canadian border, but only delayed for a year in the south, a situation that Arizona's congressional delegation says is unfair.
When he was unable to get work, he ended up filing for bankruptcy and became homeless for a time.
Givens and the U.S. Public Interest Research Group, a private consumer advocacy organization, estimate that up to 350,000 people are victimized by identity theft each year.
Many of the proposals are simply endorsements of bills already wending their way through Congress.
They don't know what to do next.
Among them:
You should also check your credit report once a year.
``And then she didn't keep up her payments.
LOS ANGELES _ For the last two years, Mari Frank has spent more than 500 hours and $10,000 to clear her name because a Ventura, Calif., woman assumed her identity, stole her credit record and racked up debt along the way.
A check-cashing business approved a $500 check, which her bank cashed.
Consumer advocates estimate that up to 350,000 people are victimized each year.
Wondering why you didn't get a job offer after that last interview?
After the NBC News report in November, she said, there was an uptick in sales, then steady sales throughout the holidays and into tax season.
nn
nn
Choosing a Shredder