Another hazard is overtraining, often from pressures to win when the goals should be fun, fitness, friendship and sportsmanship.
Since the tragedy, the dead cowboy's father, Neil Croker, has become a campaigner for safer work practices on farms.
Players might develop a false sense of security, relying on headgear instead of proper medical evaluation after suffering a concussion, federation doctors say.
"Nobody waited for the data for football and hockey" before requiring helmets in those sports, Delaney said.
Better training is needed -- players should use their shoulders or chests and keep their heads up during tackles -- and penalties for helmet contacts must be enforced.
Many of the city's drivers weave erratically between lanes and routinely ignore red lights and stop signs.
So said that being too cautious carried its own risks, possibly resulting in "social isolation, physical inactivity and psychological dependency."
In addition, risks to individual players can often be detected, and thus prevented, through a properly performed medical exam before a child plays.
Called spearing, it involves one player tackling another using the top of his helmet, either intentionally or inadvertently, when a player lowers his head in a tackle.
"Skateboards can be at least as dangerous to ride as bicycles or in-line skates," according to a legislative memorandum in support of the bill.
Two years ago, thousands of music fans gathered to mourn the death of pop music star Rodrigo Bueno, killed in a car crash near Buenos Aires.
News South Wales Farmers' Association president Mal Peters warned that substituting helmets for broad-brimmed hats would increase the hazards of skin cancer and heat stroke.
"This is because many skateboard riders practice dangerous stunts and flips on flat surfaces or walls."
Exercise-induced heat illness can be devastating, especially for those who start football practice in late summer.
Still, each year, according to the American College of Sports Medicine, more than 775,000 children under 14 are treated in emergency rooms for sports injuries, nearly half of them preventable.
In a study, published in the Clinical Journal of Sports Medicine, Delaney questioned 380 Canadian university football players and 240 university soccer players as they reported to fall training camp in 1999.
His death, from a fatal cardiac disturbance called commotio cordis, was the second in four years for a Cornell athlete that resulted from a chaotic heart rhythm.
"Why take a chance until this gets studied?"
CHILLS THAT FEVER
Placing excessive physical and psychological demands on children that they are unable or unwilling to handle can turn them off activities for life.
"Why do we have to buckle up?
China's growing love with the autocar has resulted in its car market growing by up to 80 percent in 2003 to the world's fourth largest, but which on the street has meant increasingly treacherous roads jammed with inexperienced and unsafe drivers.
With the road safety problem in the region has reached alarming proportion, Ministers determined to establish an ASEAN Multi- Section Road Safety Working Group to coordinate and oversee the implementation of the ASEAN Road Safety Strategy and Action Plan 2005-2010, adopted by the ministers Tuesday.
Another concern, he said, is nutritional abuse, which afflicts as many as 250,000 young American men who starve themselves every year to make weight in wrestling, along with an untold number of figure skaters, gymnasts and dancers who struggle to remain slim through undernutrition, dehydration and eating disorders.
By mandating the use of seat belts and helmets for motorcyclists, cracking down on speeding and drunken driving and ensuring good visibility on all roads, China would be able to reduce road fatalities, he said.
He found that 70.4 percent of the football players and 62.7 percent of the soccer players had experienced symptoms of a concussion in the previous year.
The headgear gained international visibility during the 2003 Women's World Cup and the Athens Olympics.
Several coaches interviewed in Rochester wondered why headgear were proposed for young kids and not for older teenagers, who were more likely to get concussions.
At the same time, ASEAN countries will promote the gradual harmonization and amendment of the key road safety regulations and to promote awareness and steady enforcement of traffic rules and regulations among the citizens, such as those pertaining to speed limits, driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, and the wearing of safety helmets and safety seat belts.
At the opposite extreme are young football players who gorge on sweet and fatty foods to bulk up, but put on body fat, not muscle, setting the stage for future problems with obesity.
They also vowed to commit to raise the safety standards on ASEAN roads, identify the most dangerous sections on the ASEAN road networks and implement systematic programs for accident prevention.
Both the Temecula and De Anza clubs are sponsored by Full90.
OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS.)
They may also consider having companions or supervision for more dangerous activities like swimming.
For the study, actors were asked to depict scary situations like opening a door and finding a robber, along with happy or emotionally neutral ones like pouring water.
OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS.)
This resistance, though, has not dissuaded a small number of youth clubs from requiring the use of headgear.
He likens the doubt of soccer officials to familiar but failed arguments once made against the use of bicycle helmets, automobile seat belts and soccer shin guards.
His sole protection was the tattered hat provided him for shading from the sun.
"The biggest complaint of FCAS patients is air-conditioned rooms."
The study found that fearful postures activated areas of the brain that happy or neutral postures did not, said the study's lead researcher, Dr. Beatrice de Gelder of Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston.
"I remember when baseball players didn't wear batting helmets," said Steve Ryan, commissioner of the Major Indoor Soccer League, which approves of headgear.
Why wouldn't you start protecting people?"
Many of these motorcyclist casualties could be avoided if there was widespread wearing of safety helmets.
The declaration was issued at the 10th ASEAN Transport Ministers Meeting held here on Tuesday.
The device is made of shock-absorbing foam situated between an outer layer of Lycra and an inner layer of sweat-absorbing polypropylene.
He advises people with epilepsy outside the high-risk category to take basic safety measures like wearing helmets while biking.
The measure, which Gov.
by Robert J. Saiget
The soccer federation, which permits headgear but does not endorse it, fears that its wide use would undermine the assertion that soccer is a safe alternative to football, Skeen said.
It makes no sense," grumbled taxi driver Eduardo Latorre, adding he had not seen such a zealous seat belt campaign in 17 years of navigating through the capital's chaotic streets.
Still pictures of these, with the actors' faces blurred out, were presented to seven test subjects while their brains were scanned with equipment to detect what regions of the brain were being activated.
"We're talking about marketing and fear and manipulation," said Dr. Bert Mandelbaum, team physician for the U.S. national teams.
The law, which has been in force since 1997, requires all occupants of cars, including taxis, to wear seatbelts.
Authorities are also using cameras to catch traffic violations at key intersections.
And the reactions to body language involved several areas of the brain not activated by reading faces, including some that process emotions and others that prepare for action.
But ex-cowboy Hayden Bostock blamed apathy in the ranching industry for inadequate safety equipment for cowboys.
Some can't afford it -- it's not covered by most insurance -- and others prefer to continue to bundle up.
To track the disease, Hoffman visited reunions of families carrying the affliction.
Make everyone wear knee braces?"
Another potentially disastrous injury, paralysis from the neck down, can result from the use of an improper technique in football tackles.
The total cost of road accidents is estimated at 2.3 percent of the gross domestic product in Uganda, according to the official statistics.
Pushing children to play too early or to take part in a sport chosen by the parents can backfire.
He said there is no helmet a farmer can use when the temperature reaches 45 degrees Celsius (113 degrees Fahrenheit).
"We have given these people enough time.
Be sure that your child has the desire, strength, coordination and ability to perform the activity and that the coach is able to teach the skills.
Several players interviewed, including Joy Fawcett of the U.S. women's national team, who endorses the Full90, discounted the so-called the Superman effect, saying the headgear did not make them dangerously aggressive.
But most serious hazards are preventable.
Frequency of seizures was the strongest predictor of injury, he said.
But it was rarely enforced until the campaign began Monday.
Carol Boslet reports that her grandson was constantly short of breath after physical activity, that he was intolerant of the summer heat at football camp and that he felt faint during a football practice.
The figures from the Asian Development Bank (ADB) on Monday showed that some 75,000 persons were killed and more than 4.7 million were injured in road crashes in Southeast Asian countries during 2003.
EPILEPSY AND INJURIES
"Almost no one uses seatbelts.
The total cost of road accidents is estimated at 2.3 percent of the gross domestic product in Uganda, according to the official statistics.
Those at higher risk should work with their doctors to bring their seizures under the tightest possible control, he said.
Such symptoms warranted a closer look at his cardiovascular system by a knowledgeable doctor.
Many people with epilepsy restrict their activities, fearing injury during seizures, even if the disease is well controlled.
"We Argentines are just like that, we fly through the air," he said.
"There is no evidence headgear are going to help, and some theoretical stuff that it could hurt," said Dr. Gary Green, a clinical professor at the UCLA division of sports medicine and a member of the soccer federation's medical advisory committee.
Others said risk was inherent in any sport.
A new study from Norway adds smoking and eating salty food to the list of habits that can lead to chronic acid reflux.
THE LANGUAGE OF POSTURE
One of the study's authors, Dr. Hal Hoffman of the University of California at San Diego, estimates that about 300 people, most in the United States, suffer from the disorder, familial cold autoinflammatory syndrome, or FCAS, which is caused by a single genetic mutation.
Dr. Lyle Micheli, director of the sports medicine clinic at Children's Hospital Boston, suggests starting with an emphasis on athletic technique, and only when that is mastered should power or speed be addressed.
An editorial accompanying the article noted that a loosening of restrictions for drivers with epilepsy had not been accompanied by noticeably higher accident rates.
A number of cardiac problems can result in sudden death in a young athlete, including myocarditis (an inflammation of the heart), mitral valve prolapse, long QT syndrome and Marfan syndrome.
The study, published in the journal Neurology, examined the medical records of 247 epilepsy patients who were followed for an average of 10 years.
On one side of the headgear argument is Jeff Skeen, founder of Full90.
Pataki's action means that New York has joined other states, including California, a center of skateboarding in the country, in requiring helmets.
This has triggered alarmed skepticism within the U.S. Soccer Federation, which contends that marketing to the fears of parents has trumped science regarding the effectiveness of headgear in preventing concussions.
Studies have presented contradictory results, and the matter remains disputed as the soccer federation undertakes a long-term examination of head injuries.
The Ugandan police has warned to enforce strict traffic regulations beginning from Tuesday, saying that passengers who will travel in vehicles without wearing safety belts will be arrested.
He predicted that headgear would not, either.
Though many people who skateboard said they could understand the need for safety in their sport, some wondered if it the law went too far.
It is not likely to be used to screen all teenage athletes, who are the ones most at risk, although Italy does such screening routinely.)
Most soccer players on the Santa Clara University women's team will enter the NCAA quarterfinals on Saturday wearing protective equipment -- headgear -- that is as controversial as it is lightweight.
The brain reacts more powerfully to the body language of a person in a posture denoting fear than it does to a fearful facial expression, according to a study released Monday.
Without such measures, childhood sports can lead to disillusionment, injuries and even paralysis or death.
"The stockman's hat is an icon of Australia.
The study, published on Thursday in Gut, a journal of the British Medical Association, was based on two surveys, carried out a decade apart, that included the bulk of the population of a rural county in central Norway.
Cyclists and football players can reduce their risks by wearing helmets; hockey players by wearing masks; basketball and tennis players by wearing eye guards; baseball players by wearing batting helmets.
(END OPTIONAL TRIM)
The researchers found that the odds of developing reflux were 70 percent higher for longtime smokers than for nonsmokers.
Federation officials compare the use of soccer headgear, which lack an industry safety standard, to the largely unregulated business of nutritional supplements.
Road traffic fatalities in China are predicted to increase to almost half a million deaths each year by 2020 unless urgent action is taken, the WHO said in a statement.
"The side effects of these road accidents is that families are driven into poverty as most of the victims are the breadwinners of their families," said Richard Scurfield, head of the World Bank's transportation sector.
"I think it's very good for safety."
I'm looking at this as a seatbelt."
"Being a bushman myself, we're not going to wear anything that doesn't look any good."
Even though colds are called colds, most people know that viruses are to blame, not the temperature.
Scientific studies involving large numbers of players can occur only after headgear is used widely, said Delaney, who is team physician for the McGill soccer team and the Montreal Alouettes of the Canadian Football League.
De Gelder said the brain might react more powerfully to emotions signaled through body language than to faces because faces also convey other information, like personal identity, that could slow down mental processing in a moment of danger.
Nasasira told press on Thursday that the new deadline expires at the end of the month.
The resolution of these head-related issues could have far-reaching health and financial impact, given that nearly 18 million people play soccer in the United States.
Though word of the drug's effectiveness has spread, only a few use it regularly, Hoffman said.
That was nearly double the number of tickets issued in the first six months of this year.
All three developed fevers and rashes in the hours that followed.
Inspector General of police Katumba Wamala advised public to shun taxis without seat belts, or risk being arrested and fined.
According to the traffic regulations, passengers in public and private vehicles will face arrest and up to one month in jail or an on-spot fine of 20,000 shillings (11.6 US dollars) if they travel without fastening their safety belts.
This is also a moment supercharged with disagreement on whether heading of the ball can cause concussions or long-term brain impairment.
Full90 does not claim that its headgear prevent concussions.
In the 15 months since FIFA, soccer's world governing body, began permitting its use, headgear has been used by thousands of American players from youth leagues to high school to colleges to the pros.
Ranch manager Nicholas Ennis told investigators he knew of no ranch in Australia that made cowboys wear helmets except while mustering on motorbikes.
Soccer federation officials disagree, saying their caution is based on scientific uncertainty.
She said the study, published online in The Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, offered support to Darwin's theory that emotions are useful in an evolutionary sense because they predispose us to actions that increase the chance of survival.
Nilsson said that other research conducted by his team showed that people with reflux and people worried about developing it would both also benefit from losing excess weight.
Jerry Smith, coach of the Santa Clara women's team, which received free headgear from Full90, said the equipment made his players more confident in challenging balls in the air, and more assertive, but not overly so.
Or, they say, players might feel invincible in headgear and play with reckless aggressiveness, displaying behavior known as the Superman effect.
Now, fewer than 10 percent of the 2.5 million volunteer coaches and 33 percent of the interscholastic coaches receive any type of coaching education, the National Youth Sports Safety Foundation reports.
According to traffic regulations, passengers in public and private vehicles will face arrest and up to one month in jail or an on-spot fine of 20,000 shillings (11.6 US dollars) if they travel without fastening their safety belts.
Bostock said he has been developing a lightweight, broad-brimmed hard hat that met Australian safety standards but has failed to attract enough support in the cattle and sheep industry to get the hat into production.
It appears likely that most of the cases stem from a single immigrant in the 1600s, he said, although a few result from more recent mutations.
WHO officials said that the number of fatalities officially published by China is based largely on data provided by the Public Security Bureau alone and not on inter-agency data as was tabulated in the WHO report.
But a small group of people come down with fevers when they experience chills, according to an article published Saturday in The Lancet, the medical journal.
In each case, if an automatic external defibrillator had been available and used within four minutes of the athlete's collapse, there was a good chance that he would have been saved, with his brain intact.
But none did when given an injection of anakinra before a second chilling.
Coffee and alcohol, along with favorites like chocolate and spicy foods, can still bring on symptoms in reflux patients even if they play no role in its development, said the researcher, Dr. Magnus Nilsson of the Karolinska Institute in Stockholm.
said Tom Maines, who coaches an under-10 boys team in Brockport, N.Y.
Playing surfaces should be well maintained and someone well trained in emergency medical services should be onsite at games and practice sessions.
ss problems with the way transportation is organized, factors contributing to accidents, the need to create better safety devices for vehicles and passengers and to build a better mechanism to respond to accidents, Kurg said.
Any club or association that makes headgear compulsory risks losing its affiliation with the U.S. Soccer Federation, Dr. S. Robert Contiguglia, its president, said.
"The message is getting out.
"Maybe this would be a good measure on the open highway where it would save lives, but not in Buenos Aires."
Police ticketed more than 2,500 people in the Argentine capital for failing to wear seatbelts in the opening days of a campaign that had motorists fuming as they reluctantly buckled up.
The result can be long-lasting and painful damage to bones and joints.
The concern over concussions, and whether headgear can protect against them, has become a growing issue for youth soccer associations.
He said he developed the protective device after his daughter Lauren suffered two soccer-related concussions in high school, causing her to quit the sport.
The decision to extend another month for enforcing strict traffic regulations was made at a meeting between Works Minister John Nasasira, Internal Affairs Minister Ruhakana Rugunda and Inspector General of police Major General Katumba Wamala.
Not all medical soccer experts oppose headgear.
It all stems from the death of a cowboy, who suffered massive head injuries after being trampled in a fall from a horse while mustering bulls in July 2001.
Unfortunately for coffee or wine lovers who already suffer from reflux, the study's lead researcher said the findings did not mean a green light for their consumption.
Liliana Echegaray, 44, said most people don't appreciate the danger posed by reckless driving.
Anson Dorrance, who has coached 18 women's national championship teams at North Carolina, also sponsored by Full90, said compulsory use of shin guards had not changed the nature of soccer, as many feared.
This year, police are continuing a crackdown against motorcyclists riding without helmets.
Kodesh, 25, said he uses a helmet and kneepads only when he goes to a special skate park, and said he has suffered, "some broken bones but no major injuries, thank goodness."
But they did accomplish one thing that will have far-reaching implications for young daredevils: passing a law requiring that children under 14 wear safety helmets while riding skateboards in public areas.
Likewise for Ryan Boslet who died at 17 in February 2003, during football drills in the high school gym in Alpharetta, Ga. His grandmother, Carol Boslet of Annapolis, Md., is campaigning for improved physicals for teenage athletes before they take part in sports and better education, especially among coaches and trainers.
Some also recommend mouth guards and padded goal posts instead of padded headgear.
You can't replace it with an ice-cream container on the head," Bostock said.
Police handed out 2,184 tickets on Monday alone to unbuckled drivers and passengers, the first day of the crackdown.
Although children today are generally more sedentary than ever before, more youngsters are involved in organized sports and at ever-younger ages.
Dente said highway authorities are determined to enforce basic road safety measures.
"Where are you going to draw the line?
Young athletes should be asked about occurrences of chest pain on exertion, passing out during physical activity and excessive shortness of breath or fatigue in exercise.
In FCAS, what matters is not the actual temperature but the feeling of being chilled.
He believes his product can reduce head injuries without giving an illicit advantage in heading the ball.
The Ugandan government has granted another month as the final deadline for motorists, especially owners of public service vehicles to have their vehicles fitted with safety belts, reported the state-owned newspaper The New Vision on Friday.
National Farmers Federation chief executive Anna Cronin said Australia's leading farmers' association supported initiatives to develop lightweight, broad-brimmed hard hats as an alternative to helmets.
Since the tragedy at the ranch in Merriwagga, about 500 kilometers (300 miles) west of Sydney, helmets have become compulsory for working in the saddle there, but ranchers are calling for industrial laws to be changed to reflect the differences between working in the Outback and in a city factory.
"What else do you need?
They should avoid driving and stress and should modify their homes to reduce the chance of accidents or injury, he said.
New York state's politicians have been accused of leaving most major legislative business unfinished this year.
"I'd challenge any of these doctors who feel this has no value to run into the goalpost without a Full90 and with it, then tell me, if they were forced to do it a third time, whether or not they would wear it," Dorrance said.
For accidents that may not be preventable, having an emergency plan and first-aid equipment available, and someone trained to use the equipment, can be lifesaving.
But the company does say the headgear can reduce, by up to 50 percent, the peak impact forces that occur during typical collisions when a player's head strikes another head, the ground, an elbow or a goal post.
"We've shown concussions are a problem and in the lab these things work," Delaney said of headgear.
Motorcycle riders will face a penalty of between 40,000 shillings (33 dollars) and 80,000 shillings (66 dollars) if arrested without crash helmets under the regulations.
"These are all estimates, the numbers are possibly underestimated (by China), and maybe overestimated by the WHO," Kurg told AFP.
He added: "I can't tell you if it was a huge help.
Further, from half to three-fourths of sports-related concussions are never even diagnosed; the injured are often sent back into play too soon and put at risk of another more serious brain-damaging concussion.
"And because they think it could be viewed as an admission that heading the ball itself is dangerous."
The association later retreated over concerns about liability and protests from some coaches and officials.
We cannot have a law that cannot be applied," Katumba told a press conference on Monday after the expiry of one month grace period given to all motorists.
All can impair normal growth and development and, in the long run, their basic health.
A careful family and personal history, with a well-done physical exam, can help detect these problems early.
The law was firstly supposed to start on Oct. 1, 2004.
The result can be a permanent paralyzing compression injury to the cervical spine.
ASEAN Transport Ministers issued a ministerial declaration on ASEAN road safety Tuesday to enhance the road safety and reduce the traffic casualties in member countries.
Several models are available at prices ranging from $24 to $39.
Kathy Conaboy, Jill's mother, said she held no illusion that her daughter, who has suffered two concussions, would never be hurt again while wearing a headgear.
"A seat belt is not going to save a life in a 90-mile-per hour crash into a wall," Kathy Conaboy said.
Still, he warned the initiative wouldn't necessarily lead to more responsible driving.
People who ate a lot of salted fish and meat -- traditional foods in the area -- and those who always added salt at meals were significantly more likely to develop reflux than those who never did.
If something makes you comfortable, why not?"
Motorcycle riders will face a penalty of between 40,000 shillings (33 dollars) and 80,000 shillings (66 dollars) if arrested without crash helmets under the regulations.
Gustavo Doglio, 35, predicted the crackdown would cause more people to buckle up to avoid being fined.
Had Boslet's coaches been well informed about this hazard and paid closer attention to him, the outcome would probably have been different.
When I got hit one time, maybe it gave me a little extra cushion."
Defensive players are most at risk, but others also risk paralysis by lowering their heads at contact.
"They are trying to thwart the evolution of headgear in soccer because they think it will scare soccer moms away from the sign-up table," Skeen said of soccer federation officials.
With the new crackdown, motorists were hastily buckling up to avoid fines of up to 500 pesos (US$175, euro140), said highway safety officer Fabian Dente.
For a first violation, a skateboard rider would be warned of the need for a helmet, but on subsequent violations, the rider's parent or guardian could be fined up to $50, said Kevin C. Quinn, a spokesman for the governor, who noted that judges would have discretion.
When an athlete overtrains, the risk of overuse injuries increases sharply.
Even in the best circumstances, no activity can be risk-free.
No one respects the law," she said.
Moreover, the ministers agreed to foster the development of a new culture of road safety among citizens especially the young, school-age or child population.
J. Stephen Casscles, the counsel to Sen. William J. Larkin, Jr., a Republican from the Hudson Valley, said the senator pushed the issue after a police chief in his district raised concerns about the safety of child skateboarders who mimic stunts from video games.
According to a survey by Asian Development Bank (ADB), Motorcyclists and pedestrians are by far the biggest proportion of those killed or injured.
"You could almost say that when you see a fearful body you react with your whole body," de Gelder said.
The annual economic losses from road crashes are estimated to be around 15 billion US dollars, or 2.2 percent of the region's total gross domestic product.
The headgear debate is occurring at a time when some studies indicate that concussions occur in soccer at a rate similar to football.
The implementation of the strict traffic law was supposed to start on Oct. 1 but the government extended it for one month.
"I think we can still have that fantasy of romantic, wild west-type attitude but with safety added on," Croker told Australian Broadcasting Corp. radio
Few people would question the value of participating in sports for young people.
In March, in a lacrosse game at Cornell University, a shot by a Binghamton player struck Cornell's defenseman George Boiardi above the heart, killing him.
But those fears appear to be overblown, a new Mayo Clinic study concludes.
Rather than headgear, federation officials advocate better technique, stricter rules enforcement and improved officiating to reduce the number of head injuries.
The warning was given after one month extension granted by the government.
The De Anza Force soccer club of Cupertino, Calif., will require headgear for players under 17, beginning in March, said Tom Pridham, a club official.
The sweat-stained felt hats worn by Australian cowboys, as much a part of the Outback as kangaroos and sun-baked soil, may be heading for the history books.
Every coach should insist on frequent breaks for water and rest in the shade, plan practices for early or late in the day and avoid use of full uniforms in hot weather.
He said most violators were being ticketed, though a few only received warnings.
The founder of a San Diego-based company called Full90 said he has sold 100,000 headgear, which resemble an enlarged headband, weigh less than 2 ounces, and cover the forehead, temples and occipital bone in back of the head.
Along with their symptoms, the patients also share a common family folklore.
"A 30 mile-per-hour crash, a fender bender, it helps.
"It's very typical here that authorities announce a campaign for something ... and after a few days all is forgotten," said Silveira, who heads the group "Let's Fight For Life."
Speeding and drunken driving also contribute to the country's high death rate, Silveira said.
"It doesn't have to be very cold," Hoffman said.
The law takes effect on Jan. 1.
He recommends increasing a young athlete's training time by no more than 10 percent a week to reduce the risk of injury.
Josh Rabinowitz, the publisher of the SkateboardDirectory.com skateboard directory and search engine, said he saw the law chipping away at civil liberties and parents' rights to raise their children the way they want to.
The New South Wales state government brought charges against the ranch owner, who employed 23-year-old Daniel Croker, convicting and fining the company 95,000 Australian dollars (US$72,000; euro56,000) last month for breaches of safety, including failure to provide the horseman with an equestrian helmet.
This is the second extension of the traffic regulations.
Doctors affiliated with the federation also say that headgear is being marketed primarily to children, who least need them because there is little incidence of concussions in players under the age of 12.
.
What she hopes, she said, is that a blow that might have caused a third concussion will result in only a bruise.
Fashion aside, Ross Paule, a midfielder for the Columbus Crew of Major League Soccer, wore a Full90 headgear for a dozen games in the recently completed season, seeking some security after suffering three earlier concussions.
Dr. J. Scott Delaney of McGill University in Montreal said laboratory data, not yet published, does indicate that headgear could reduce impact forces by 10 to 30 percent.
More than 7,000 people were killed in road accidents in Argentina in 2003, according to Silveira, a death rate reported to be at least seven times higher than in most industrialized nations.
It found that only 39 of them suffered seizure-related injuries and that most of them were minor, usually bruises to the head.
(The exam to detect hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, an echocardiogram, costs about $800.
"I'm on the fence," said Paule, who was not paid to endorse the headgear.
Many in Buenos Aires praised the enforcement effort.
They fail modern industrial safety standards.
Rabinowitz, 34, of Manhattan, said the law was just another way for government to raise revenue, "like all of these ticketing laws that are supposedly for our safety."
Delaney said an industry standard for headgear has been drafted and could be instituted in May.
Meanwhile, the economic impact of China's poor road safety is enormous, costing the country between 12 to 21 billion dollars annually, or between one and two percent of China's GNP.
The study found that coffee, alcohol and tea appear to have no effect on the odds of developing the disorder, which is marked by heartburn and frequent regurgitation, while exercise and high-fiber bread appeared to offer some protection.
"You see some resistance in soccer, which is natural.
The report, based on statistics provided by the Chinese government, estimated that some 250,000 people died on Chinese roads in 2002, while more than 16 million a year are injured.
"I don't agree it should be mandated.
"This deadline is final," he said and warned that after it expired, any vehicle found without seat belts would be impounded and the passengers fined.
Official Chinese statistics, however, say that around 104,000 people died in traffic accidents in the country in each of the years 2002 and 2003, an average of about 285 people a day.
WHO calls on China to lower 680-a-day road accident death toll
Finally, the consistent use of proper-fitting and well-maintained protective athletic equipment is a must for every young athlete.
Calvin Williams, founder of the Kangaroo headgear company, said he thought soccer officials resisted the equipment because they felt "it is sissified."
Because Full90 pays some pro players (the equivalent of $50 to $100 per game, it says) and some state soccer associations ($4,000 to $10,000) to endorse its product, the soccer federation says the company's claims are suspect.
An estimated 300,000 athletes experience exercise-related heat illnesses each year, and almost all of them should have been avoided.
"We require protecting of the shin, and the head is a far more precious part of the body than the shin," Pridham said.
"These are five important elements that can be effective and that are not expensive to implement," Kurg said.
The other death, of a freshman wrestler named Graham Morin in November 2000, was a result of a rare, previously undetected heart disorder called hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
With proper training, supervision, protective equipment and techniques, and an appropriate emphasis on winning, sports can foster a healthy body and spirit and a lifelong interest in being active and fit.
Tune in to the signs of overtraining: The child's performance may slack off, motivation to practice may be lacking and the child may tire easily or become irritable or unwilling to cooperate.
Insufficient independent evidence exists to confirm that headgear can reduce the risk of head injuries, they say.
But I expect over time, you will see it broadly accepted."
The new study tested an arthritis drug, anakinra, which blocks the effect of a protein that is part of the chain of reactions identified in the cold syndrome.
The bulk of the injuries occurred among people with the most serious cases: those with uncontrolled seizures, with generalized convulsions or drop attacks, or those who had suffered injuries in falls in the past, according one of the study's authors, Dr. Elson L. So of the Mayo Clinic.
Alberto Silveira, president of a road-safety advocacy group, said he welcomed the crackdown on violators, but feared the enforcement effort might not last.
The story is that the disease started when an ancestor fell into cold water.
"It's like a flag that reminds you not to go up for stupid plays," said Jill Conaboy, a defender at Downingtown West High in suburban Philadelphia, who wore a headgear last weekend as her team won the Pennsylvania Class AAA state championship.
But that threat is either unknown or ignored by the Temecula Valley Soccer Association in southern California, which for three seasons has required headgear for players under 8.
A half-hour session of strenuous physical activity once a week or more, and regular consumption of high-fiber bread both appeared to cut the risk of reflux in half, the study said.
In September, the New York State West Youth Soccer Association, which governs more than 200 clubs and 80,000 kids in the Buffalo-Rochester area, voted to require headgear for all players under 14.
"For a farmer who's mustering a mob of sheep, moving very slowly behind them without any air circulation, he or his employee may be subject to heat stroke," Peters said.
We had more than 2,000 tickets issued Monday but today there were only 520 issued by midday," said Fabian, who was manning a seatbelt checkpoint.
(The soccer federation says this involves low-level forces that don't cause concussions.)
Peter Schilperoort, president of the association, said headgear prevented bumps and cuts previously suffered by his players, calling the equipment "the best thing since sliced bread."
"I'm a transportation specialist and I have worked with (China's) Ministry of Communications to jointly try to tackle the road safety issue, but I think that my colleagues agree with me that we weren't very successful," Scurfield, who lived and worked in China for many years, said.
George E. Pataki signed on Nov. 16, mirrors the state laws already in place to protect bicycle riders and those who use in-line skates against serious head injuries.
To help reduce these risks, the National Center for Sports Safety, with the National Athletic Trainers' Association, offers a three-hour online safety course for coaches for $28 at www.SportsSafety.org.
At 46, Skeen possesses the righteousness of the aggrieved parent.
A group of 3,153 people who reported reflux were compared with 40,210 people who reported no significant symptoms.
Authorities said they issued over 520 additional tickets by midday Tuesday.
ADB warned that "if Southeast Asian nations don't start taking road safety seriously, there will be 385,000 road deaths and 24 million injuries in the next five years, incurring more than 88 billion dollars in economic losses."
REFLUX TRIGGERS
"But what we do know is that the problem is very big, that China has the highest rate in the world and the number of deaths is going up very rapidly."
Brad E. Kodesh, president of the A1skateboards.com Web site, which sells skateboard equipment, said he did not think the law was necessary, because "ultimately, I think, wearing a helmet is the rider's decision; it should be enforced by the parents."
(STORY CAN END HERE.
(STORY CAN END HERE.
First, three women with the disorder were monitored after they sat in a 36-degree room for 45 minutes.
Victims have included the Duchess of York's mother, Susan Barrantes, killed in a 1998 car accident in Argentina.
ATTENTION - INSERTS details, ADDS quotes ///