The University of California study was initiated in part to see whether getting the drug from a pharmacy would be more acceptable to women than getting it from a clinic, and Raine said the results appear to show it was not.
The protesters said they wanted to speak with Steven Galson, acting director of the FDA's Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, who in May rejected an application to allow Plan B to be sold over the counter.
``Our findings were that women don't change their sexual behavior when the drug is easily available, but rather that they're more likely to use it if access is easier,'' said lead author Tina Raine of the Center for Reproductive Health Research and Policy of the University of California, San Francisco.
The study, published in the April issue of the Journal of Pediatric and Adolescent Gynecology, found that teens who had emergency contraception on hand were not more likely to have unprotected sex.
The study contradicts a key claim made by opponents of easier access to Plan B at a time when the Food and Drug Administration is preparing to decide on a second application to allow nonprescription sales of the drug.
The findings led the study authors to conclude that easy access to Plan B, also called the morning-after pill, could cut the number of unwanted pregnancies while posing no apparent risk to women.
At some point, the left needs to accept that most Americans have grown uncomfortable with the practice of terminating pregnancies to avoid responsibility of rearing children and with partial-birth abortions that are done after the first trimester.
Plan B supporters say the pill is a safe way to prevent thousands of unwanted pregnancies and the abortions that sometimes follow.
But we need better choices than those of the moralizing right, whose restrictive policies on sex education, emergency contraception (the morning after pill) and medical care for the working poor force many women to choose between an abortion and rearing a child in poverty.
The agency promised to reconsider if the pill's manufacturer, Barr Laboratories of Pomona, New York, figured out how to sell over the counter only to those 16 and older.
Nearly one-third of sexually active Portuguese girls between the ages of 15 and 19 have taken the "morning-after" pill to prevent pregnancy, according to a study published Thursday in the daily Publico.
"We have to pay more attention to young women, this is where the greatest potential risks exist," the president of the association, Daniel Pereira da Silva, told the newspaper.
"My basic concern remains that the pharmacist ought to be able to conscientiously object to participate in something that is the potential taking of human life," he said.
Some see easy access to emergency contraception as a way to drastically reduce teen pregnancy, already on the decline in the United States since the early 1990s.
"It encourages risky sexual activity with the promise `just pop a pill in the morning and you don't need to worry about pregnancy,'" said Wendy Wright of Concerned Women of America, a conservative group that focuses on social issues.
FDA officials said Galson was not available to meet the women but acting Deputy Commissioner Janet Woodcock would be willing to see five of the demonstrators.
"If yougo into a profession to assist the medical needs of people, you are not in a position to single out women just because you believe a prescription is something other than what the FDA says it is," Laser said.
The new study, being published Wednesday in the Journal of the American Medical Association, supports the position taken by much of the FDA review staff and 23 of 27 members of the FDA advisory panel that the drug could be safely and properly used without a prescription.
The first of possibly several bills seeking to let Texas pharmacists "just say no" to filling prescriptions for emergency contraceptives has been filed before the legislative session that begins in January.
Last week three conservative legislators denounced Mazzetti for "lying" when she reported to Peru's Justice Ministry that the pills are not a form of abortion because they cancel a pregnancy before the fertilized egg implants itself in the uterus.
It should be next to condoms in drug stores," said Kelly Mangan, 22, president of the University of Florida's chapter of the National Organization for Women.
"Our intent is to affect the prescriptions that terminate pregnancies -- that's what most of the pharmacists are concerned about," he said.
Some protesters have called for civil disobedience if the FDA official who rejected the first Plan B application, Steven Galson of the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, refuses to meet with them.
Nine women protesting the Food and Drug Administration's position on the emergency contraceptive Plan B were arrested Friday when they blocked entry to the agency's Rockville, Md., headquarters.
Yet fully 83.4 percent of 15-to-19-year-old women said they had received information on contraceptives at school, according to the study by the Portuguese Society of Gynecology.
Also on Friday, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists called on the FDA to approve the new application.
The pharmacist told Lacey that she did not believe in any form of birth control and advised her to go to a nearby Walgreens for assistance, said Lacey, of Fort Worth.
However, a physician who opposes over-the-counter sale of emergency contraception fears that young women would skip regular visits to the gynecologist if they didn't need to see a doctor to get it.
While the FDA has approved it only for prescription use, six states have passed laws that allow pharmacists to dispense the drug without a prescription after a discussion with the woman.
Making the contraception available over the counter, they say, is crucial for women who might need the protection over a weekend or when it is difficult to obtain a prescription.
But the study, which only followed women for six months, found that the two groups had about the same pregnancy rate, undercutting the argument that Plan B prevents unwanted pregnancies and abortion.
The study was carried out by the association among 3,858 women between the ages of 15 and 49, the paper said.
``ACOG and other organizations have estimated that greater access to emergency contraceptives could cut the U.S. unintended pregnancy and abortion rates in half,'' the group said in a statement.
"These issues are beyond the scope of our drug approval process, and I have not considered them in this decision," wrote Galson, who last spring rejected the first application for Plan B's sale over the counter.
Nonetheless, about 37 percent of women in the group given Plan B to take home used it at least once during the six months, compared with 21 percent in the clinic-access group and 24 percent in the pharmacy-access group.
Others worry that its long-term effects on young women are unknown or argue that the drug, also known as the "morning after pill," encourages teens to have sex.
The Bush administration has been cool to the expanded use of emergency contraception, which some conservatives see as a form of abortion.
A recent congressional report found the program's materials warn that touching another's genitals ``can result in pregnancy'' and that condoms fail to prevent HIV transmission one-third of the time.
"Some staff have expressed the concern that this decision is based on non-medical implications of teen sexual behavior, or judgments about the propriety of this activity," said the memo by the FDA's acting drug chief, Dr. Steven Galson.
Some opponents also have argued that easier access to the morning-after pill would make teens more likely to engage in risky sexual behavior _ though some doctors say that research done at the University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine casts doubt on that argument.
The study did find that women given a supply to keep at home were almost twice as likely to use the drug after unprotected sex as those who had to pick it up at a clinic or pharmacy.
The morning-after pill is a higher dose of the contraceptive hormones found in the Pill.
One of the protest organizers, Alex Leader from New York, said the demonstrators opposed any age restrictions and are concerned that the agency will not approve the new application at all.
It's not a stretch to visualize a time in the near future when babies will be able to survive outside the womb much earlier than they do today.
The drug's makers are again asking for FDA approval; this time they propose to sell Plan B (the drug's trade name) only to people 16 and older without restrictions.
After the FDA rejected its initial application, the maker of Plan B, Barr Pharmaceuticals, resubmitted a modified application to address the concerns about teen-age users.
The women, part of a noisy protest in favor of making the morning-after pill available without a prescription, were taken away by officers of the Department of Homeland Security and charged with disorderly conduct.
Each year, there are about 3 million unintended pregnancies _ and in about 800,000 of those cases the parents are teenagers, according to the federal Centers for Disease Control.
The sooner the pill is taken, the more effective it is.
The FDA could decide on the request in the coming months.
The study, one of the largest ever carried out into the contraceptive habits of Portuguese women, also found 16 percent of all sexually active girls in this age group do not use any form of birth control at all, the paper said.
``The Bush administration is playing to its social conservatives by not approving Plan B, even though the experts say it's safe.
So, it seems, is the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, which is stalling a decision on whether to make the morning-after pill available nationwide without a prescription.
The study was funded by grants from a number of private foundations that invested in the Women's Capital Corporation, which initially developed the drug.
The FDA's initial decision to reject nonprescription sales touched off sharp criticism -- from FDA's staff and members of its expert advisory panel, among others -- that the agency was bowing to political pressure from social conservatives.
The company now proposes that drug stores check customers' ages to be certain that buyers are at least 16, an approach the FDA has not approved before.
The company's new application would make the drug available over the counter for women older than 16, and by prescription-only for those who are younger.
"They also want to make sure that there is some alternative for the patient."
Opponents worry that the drug encourages women _ teenagers in particular _ to have risky sex.
"What we're concerned about is a number of young people who are not engaged in sexual activity who feel tremendous pressure, and this will only add to the pressure that is on them," Wright said.
Mazzetti said the pill, which contains the hormone levonorgestrel and is sold in Lima pharmacies under the brand-name Postinor-2, prevents pregnancy by inhibiting ovulation.
Earlier this year, the FDA denied one drug company's request to sell its brand of emergency contraception to anyone.
The definition in the bill of emergency contraceptives, commonly called the morning-after pill, also fits some nonemergency contraceptives, or birth-control pills.
Raine said neither the foundations nor Barr Pharmaceuticals, which supplied the drugs for the women, had any influence over the study.
Researchers in San Francisco found that women who were given a supply of Plan B to keep at home were no more likely to have unprotected intercourse than women who had to go to a clinic or pharmacy for the contraceptive.
In a letter to President Bush, 49 members of Congress asked that the application be rejected.
Barr spokeswoman Carol Cox said the company still believes the drug can be safely sold on open shelves but would accept a compromise to place Plan B behind the counter.
The study found that roughly the same percentage of each group had unprotected sex over a six-month period, that incidence of sexually transmitted disease was equal, and that about the same percentage became pregnant.
As part of abstinence-only sex education, which the president champions and taxpayers now fund to the tune of $170 million annually, U.S. teens are being taught a bunch of hooey.
Because medical experts do not consider a woman to be pregnant until after an egg implants into the uterus, the morning-after pill is not considered abortion, although some conservatives object to any interference with a fertilized egg.
When the bill's language is refined, it should only refer to the morning-after pill, said state Rep. Charles Hopson, D-Jacksonville.
If this accusation is presented, the Ministry of Health will have to back up its decisions."
Last May, the FDA rejected nonprescription sales of emergency contraception, against the overwhelming recommendation of the agency's own scientific advisers.
No surprise then that the administration argues that allowing adolescents easy access to the morning-after pill would only confuse its abstinence message.
That would require a pharmacy employee to retrieve the drug, making enforcement of an age restriction easier.
Opponents claim that easy access would encourage promiscuity, despite data to the contrary from states such as California, where the pill is more freely available.
A recent study by the University of Pittsburgh Medical School found that teens who had emergency contraception on hand were not more likely to have unprotected sex.
Such access, some argue, would make it easier to get emergency contraception on evenings and weekends, allowing more women to take it in the recommended 72-hour window after unprotected sex.
The FDA said it worried that there was not enough data about the pill's use by young teenagers.
That proposal would allow the drug to be sold to women over 16 without a prescription but would require a doctor's order for girls below that age.
"Emergency contraception is not true contraception," says Sierra Correa, the 22-year-old vice president of Collegians For Life, a student group that opposes the morning-after pill.
Omitted from the final version was draft language about the effectiveness of emergency contraception in preventing pregnancy.
They were, however, more likely to use the drug correctly to prevent pregnancy.
Groups opposing the bill, as well as the bill's author, said its language will probably change during the legislative process to accommodate certain concerns.
Providing women with easy access to the emergency contraceptive Plan B did not lead them to engage in more risky sexual behavior, a study of more than 2,000 young California women has concluded.
That's a major reason anti-abortion groups _ from the American Life League to the Pro-Life Action League _ are among emergency contraception's main opponents.
Their efforts to keep young people ignorant about sex -- with abstinence-only sex education -- deprives many of them of the knowledge they need to prevent unwanted pregnancies.
Hopson, who is also a pharmacist, said the bill needs to clearly state that patients will be presented with an alternative if a pharmacist refuses to serve them.
Fierce arguments have gone on inside and outside the Food and Drug Administration, which may decide as soon as this week whether drug stores can sell the emergency contraception known as Plan B without a prescription to women age 16 and older.
A department spokesman said the new guidelines do not '' supersede the many state, local and tribal protocols that are currently in practice.''
In most states the drug has stayed off-limits to everyone -- teens and adults -- who can't get to a doctor within 72 hours after unprotected sex or can't afford one.
The policy is utterly inexplicable, unless it is to placate those who think condoms could encourage adults to have sex.
The U.S. government is considering whether to make morning-after birth control available without a prescription, and like most issues that involve sex and pregnancy, it has generated heated debate.
"This bill would cause women to have to rol the dice every time they went to have a prescription filled," spokeswoman Sarah Wheat said.
The young woman is a patient of Dr. Bernadith Russell, the attending physician at Long Island Hospital's obstetrics and gynecology department who also works in private practice at teen clinics in Brooklyn.
But the State Board of Education's backward move to prevent sex education regarding condoms and other contraceptives from reaching Texas classrooms runs counter to most parents' sentiments.
More pernicious is the administration's reluctance to back international AIDS prevention programs that distribute condoms, a reluctance that could cost millions of Asians and Africans their lives.
Staunchly Roman Catholic Portugal has one of the highest teen pregnancy rates in the European Union.
Kelly Mangan, a National Organization for Women activist from Florida who was among those arrested, said the group has pledges from 2,000 other women to break the law by sharing their prescription-purchased Plan B with women who need it but have no prescription.
Texas' law that requires parents to be notified (or a review by a judge) if their minor children seek an abortion is a reasonable restriction that respects the sensibilities of most Texans.
I just want to know where they are going to draw the line."
The FDA turned down the initial application last May, saying there wasn't enough information on how easy access would affect the sexual behavior of young teens.
Twelve states now allow pharmacists who oppose contraception to refuse to fill prescriptions for birth control, including the ``morning-after pill.''
In its current form, the bill would allow pharmacists to refuse to dispense some birth-control pills.
Mothers who can't raise their children face the heartbreaking prospect of giving their babies over to a callous system that passes them from one stranger's arms to another.
"Evidently, in a democratic country, everyone has the liberty to make denunciations and accusations and whatever.
Younger teenagers could continue to get the drug with a doctor's prescription.
In an indication of the strong feelings on both sides, advocates of Plan B plan to sit in Friday at FDA headquarters in suburban Bethesda, Md.
The legislators, who argued that life begins upon fertilization, want Congress to vote on whether to lift Mazzetti's constitutional immunity to face criminal charges.
This week, the Justice Department issued guidelines for treating rape victims that make no mention of emergency contraception, leading to criticism from women's health groups and others that a standard precaution for rape victims was being ignored.
What we need now is this sort of honest discussion of the issue that reflects current realities and values.
Medical advancements that permit women to hear their baby's heartbeat at four weeks, see their fingers and toes at 10 weeks and allow babies to survive outside the womb at 24 weeks have influenced our perception of when life begins.
Whatever the impetus, the emerging results are astonishing.
We do have the power to make abortions rare, and it can be done without passing a law.
"Women find the experience of being denied a prescription humiliating and demoralizing."
But like most Americans, I don't want the government deciding the issue for a woman.
On the Net:
On the Web:
The morning-after pill is a higher dose of regular hormonal contraception that works to prevent pregnancy if taken within 72 hours after intercourse.
Only 40 years ago, within the memory of millions of Americans, birth control could not be legally sold in some states, even to married couples.
Friday's protest came as the agency is preparing to rule later this month on a second application by Barr Pharmaceuticals Inc. to make Plan B more easily accessible.
"This is not based on personal beliefs, but in technical and scientific studies that show the pill is not abortive."
Now that company, Barr Pharmaceuticals, has submitted a second proposal _ to sell its Plan B brand to people 16 and older, but to require anyone younger than that to consult a physician.
If over-the-counter sales are permitted, older teenagers or adults might buy the pills for some of their younger friends or their sexual partners, critics say.
The administration's response has been to sink millions of dollars into abstinence-only education, depleting funds from programs that provide contraception.
The new legislation was filed to allow pharmacists the same protections other Texas health care professionals enjoy, said its author, state Rep. Frank Corte Jr., R-San Antonio.
"Some of th big chain stores are comfortable with the concept, but they would like to know which pharmacists will fill all prescriptions and which ones will not," Hopson said.
Ultimately, it will be up to Food and Drug Administration officials to decide: Should older teens be able to buy emergency contraception without a prescription?
That would not sit well with members of the Texas Abortion and Reproductive Rights Action League, an organization spokeswoman said.
The Texas Alliance for Life supports the legislation, said Joe Pojman, executiv director.
But the section on ``Pregnancy Risk Evaluation and Care'' is a scant half-page of euphemisms and generalities.
Plan B consists of the synthetic progestin levonorgestrel and is most effective when used within 24 hours of an unprotected sexual encounter.
To most doctors, it is not a method of abortion.
The need for speed is a key argument made by advocates of easier access.
"I'm very concerned that women get the proper health care, but I'm also concerned with the health care providers."
___
E-mail:
___
___
In the United States, 19 percent of women who get abortions are teenagers.
They rejected the offer.
The study looked at 2,117 San Francisco-area women ages 15 to 24 who were randomly put into one of three groups.
Actually, studies find that condoms are nearly always effective in blocking HIV and other sexually transmitted diseases if used properly (and we hope we don't need to refute the first assertion).
It also can thin the uterus lining, making it difficult for a fertilized egg to implant.
It is an otherwise laudable effort to help win more rape cases, outlining in 140 graphic pages the best practices for evidence collection, forensic analysis and victim support.
One third were given the drug to take home, one third were told it could be picked up without a prescription at a clinic, and the final third could get it without a prescription at a pharmacy.
Texas Pharmacy Association policy calls for pharmacists to discuss concerns about dispensing prescriptions with their employers before refusing service to a patient, said Jim Martin, the association's executive director.
"I can't begin to say how much of a barrier that is," Russell says.
"They're not going to get their pap smears; they're not going to get screened for sexually transmitted disease," says Dr. Gene Rudd, a gynecologist who serves as associate executive director of the Tennessee-based Christian Medical Association.
(ONLINE: To read the bill, go to www.capitol.state.tx.us; Texas Pharmacy Association, www.texaspharmacy.org.
If President Bush and his allies in Congress are successful, the future could look much like that past.
The liberals are no better.
The motivation for others may be disapproval of sex outside of marriage -- by adults as well as teens.
Some who work for the FDA believed that questions about people's sexual behavior were overwhelming scientific ones, according to an internal agency memo written last year.
Others, including some young women, see it as a way for teens who don't want their parents to know they're having sex to help prevent unwanted pregnancy.
We could make real progress in reducing abortions if groups on both sides used their resources to help women overcome the conditions that make abortions so appealing.
Each side accuses the other of manipulating science for political purpose.
She says the topic of unplanned pregnancy and emergency contraception comes up with her patients nearly every day.
Outlawing abortion isn't the answer.
American opinion has shifted since 1973, when the U.S. Supreme Court decided the landmark Roe vs. Wade case.
Not contested, by either side, is that the drug is drug is safe or effective.
The religious right's fingerprints also can be seen on the Justice Department's first-ever guidebook, released last fall, on treating sexual assault victims.
It also concluded that those teens were more likely to use emergency contraception correctly and sooner after sex, when it is most effective.
Pharmacists are worried that they may face repercussions if they choose to follow their conscience and refuse to serve a customer on moral or ethical grounds, Corte said.
Abortion is illegal in Peru, except in cases where the mother's life is in danger.
Sale without a prescription have received support from both the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists and American Medical Association.
The association has not formulated a position on this legislation, Martin said.
The morning-after pill acts by impeding ovulation, fertilization and implantation.
The same logic is behind ``refusal'' laws.
Women with easy access were more likely to use Plan B, leading researchers to conclude that easy access could prevent unwanted pregnancies.
She was arrested this month in a protest outside the FDA's headquarters in suburban Maryland.
But few want to discuss it with their parents _ or use insurance to buy emergency contraception out of fear their parents will find out.
Never again should women be forced to back alleys or foreign countries to terminate their pregnancies -- particularly if they've been raped or if pregnancy poses a life-threatening risk to a mother.
But I haven't talked to a single woman who regretted having the child she had considered aborting.
This bill, and similar legislation passed or recently proposed in about a dozen other states, discriminates against women, said Rachel Laser, senior counsel with the National Women's Law Center in Washington, D.C.
The company expects a decision next year.
The medical profession does not consider emergency contraception to be an abortion pill like RU-486, or Mifeprex, because Plan B works by preventing a pregnancy from starting rather than ending an existing one.
``We don't trust the FDA at this point,'' Leader said.
FDA staff reviewers and an advisory panel of outside experts had strongly recommended approval, saying the emergency contraceptive could be safely sold without a prescription.
Peru's health minister said Monday that government plans to distribute morning-after birth control pills at public health clinics will begin as scheduled in January, despite an attempt by conservative lawmakers in this predominantly Roman Catholic country to have her prosecuted for promoting abortion.
Pharmacits should make arrangements to ensure that customers can get their prescription filled, even though one pharmacist may object to filling a prescription for a specific drug, Martin said.
So earlier this year, when a Food and Drug Administration panel recommended that emergency contraception be available without a prescription, a top agency official overruled the scientists.
But those who believe that life begins at conception think it is, and Justice officials apparently are seeking to appease them.
Sen. Rick Santorum, R-Pa., plans to reintroduce his bill from last year to extend that right nationwide.
A stronger dose of regular hormonal contraception, the morning-after pill can prevent pregnancy by delaying a woman's ovulation or keeping sperm from fertilizing an egg.
The Bush administration's simplistic policies for complicated and difficult family planning problems like teen pregnancies looked naive four years ago; their continued application in light of ongoing research looks ridiculous.
About 40 protesters, mostly from Florida and New York, took part in the demonstration.
But taken within 72 hours of unprotected intercourse, they can cut a woman's chances of pregnancy by up to 89 percent.
It prevents ovulation or fertilization, and can prevent a fertilized egg from implanting into the uterus.
Alberta Phillips writes for The Austin American-Statesman.
Three representatives of Concerned Women for America, which opposes easier access to Plan B, were also present.
"The decision is made and there is no turning back," Health Minister Pilar Mazzetti told reporters.
A strong conviction that teenagers should not have sex can leave no room for reality -- like the fact that many teenagers do have sex, no matter what society or their elders say.
"Drug companies have been getting away with calling it contraception by redefining pregnancy to mean implantation" of a fertilized egg.
While many in the medical field do not share their view, they see interfering with a fertilized egg as abortion.
Martha Irvine is a national writer specializing in coverage of people in their 20s and younger.
In January, pharmacists at an Eckerd Drug Store in Denton denied a morning-after pill to a rape victim.
Over the years, I have met very few women who didn't regret their abortions.
It has become difficult to think of a living, growing organism with a heartbeat and brain as merely a fetus -- whether it is a few weeks or several months old.
She asked that her name not be used because her parents don't know she used the morning-after pill in April.
To be effective, it must be taken within 72 hours of intercourse.
But, "Our position is that a pharmacist has a right to fill or not fill a prescription," Martin said.
Plan B can prevent pregnancy for up to 72 hours after sex.
He also says some young women might not want to use emergency contraception if they knew how it worked.
Younger teens would have to consult a physician.
"Kids are going to end up having kids because they're hiding from their parents; they're too scared to tell them," said a 17-year-old in New York City.
Wendy Wright, CWA's policy director, said she hopes ``the FDA won't base its decision on stunts like this.''
In March, a CVS pharmacist in North Richland Hills refused to fill Julee Lacey's prescription for birth control pills.
Legal or not, abortions will continue until women no longer have to seriously contemplate whether their babies would be better off if they were never born.
For some Bush supporters, religious beliefs about when life begins or about interfering with ``natural law'' justify limiting access to common forms of birth control.
That's a tragedy.
"We have to consider what could happen if this should go any further.
Three pharmacists were fired as a result of that incident.
But ifthe bill is passed, it should not stand between a woman and her health care needs, he said.
That's why U.S. Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton's recent candor on abortion -- that it should be rare, but legal -- was welcome.
This study confirms other findings and is one reason why most obstetricians and gynecologists back easy access.
But some critics of Plan B consider it an abortifacient.
Studies have shown that emergency contraception works for about 72 hours after unprotected sex but is best used within 24 hours.
Peru's Medical Board has endorsed Mazzetti, and Rocio Villanueva, Peru's deputy human rights ombudsman, said the criminal allegations against Mazzetti "have no basis."
If a woman already is pregnant, morning-after pills have no effect.
Most parents certainly agree with President Bush that teen sex is a bad idea.
There are some people who don't believe in trasplants.
"We have pharmacists who have received ultimatums from their employers."
Surely this backward future is not what most Bush supporters thought they voted for last fall.
``You could have a 40-year-old man who is committing statutory rape on a 14-year-old simply going in and picking up Plan B himself.
A study this month is providing evidence for both sides.
We should have this at our fingertips.
Giving teens false and misleading information is bad enough.
Visit the Star-Telegram's online services at www.star-telegram.com) nn
Women need this drug available now.''
"I entrust my care to my physician, not my pharmacist," Lacey said.
More than 1 million abortions are preformed each year in this country.
It doesn't help that so many Texas children are languishing in state foster homes.
Their abortion-on-demand policies ignore medical advancements and evolving societal values.
She can be reached at mirvine(at)ap.org
For instance, six pages detail testing protocols for sexually transmitted disease, treatment and psychological counseling.
Princeton's emergency contraception site: http://www.NOT-2-LATE.com
In July, Barr again applied for approval.
This editorial appeared in Friday's Los Angeles Times:
This editorial appeared in Saturday's Los Angeles Times:
Like most Catholics, I oppose abortion.
She said allowing nonprescription sales ``would be simply disastrous.''
This time maybe science -- and reality -- will trump moral certainty.
Abortion should remain legal.
"Any time one assumes public office there is a risk," Mazzetti said.
American Life League's site: http://www.MorningAfterPill.org
What a choice.
These are minority kids, mostly African-American.
But even though adults may hector endlessly, an estimated 800,000 teen-age girls still become pregnant every year.
An age limit won't stop anyone.''
aphillips@statesman.com
"Women's reproductive rights shouldn't hinge on someone else's schedule.
Lacey remembers feeling frustrated.