Surrounded by a throng of reporters at Heathrow Airport on Thursday, Islam said it was ludicrous that he's on Washington's no-fly list, suspected of ties to terrorists, and said he would challenge the decision to block him from entering the country.
"I request you, in the name of Allah ... to release the British citizen Ken Bigley for the good name of our religion and according to the sayings of Allah in the Glorious Quran," said Islam, who was taken off a Washington-bound plane last month and expelled from the United States after his name turned up on a list of people suspected of having terrorist links.
Ask Loeffler and his bandmates/siblings Sam and Pete to list the music that influenced the band's sound, and they'll list Helmet, Tool, Sinead O'Connor and Yusuf Islam -- the artist once known as Cat Stevens and most recently in the news as being on the United State's no-fly list for alleged ties to terrorism, an accusation the artist vehemently denies.
"The flight was diverted after it was learned that a passenger on the no-fly list was onboard the aircraft, so out of an abundance of caution TSA took swift action to divert the flight to Bangor, Maine," she said.
The "Man for Peace" award was being given to Islam "for his dedication to promote peace, the reconciliation of people and to condemn terrorism," said a press release by the Gorbachev Foundation and Rome's City Hall.
On Friday, Michael Hoyt, the executive editor of the Columbia Journalism Review, said that in some ways Stewart was providing a counterbalance to the conservatism of the Fox News Channel.
Shelley Ross, the producer of "Prime Time Live" who came up with the idea to do the musical news satire gag on her program, inspired by "That was the Week That Was" in the 1960s, said she felt satire was a proper response to searching times.
The singer formerly known as Cat Stevens, now Yusuf Islam, is trying to get off the no-fly list after he was removed from a London-to-Washington flight because the list said he had links to terrorists.
He's been honing his oratorical skills since the age of 3, and the way they see it, by not allowing himself to be reduced to tears, the president was the big winner tonight."
"We need urgently the new system of Secure Flight to avoid" incidents like the one that occurred Saturday, he said.
"The premise of any joke delivered by oddball newscasters is that they're making fun of the media's treatment of news as much as they are the subjects of the news," he said.
Gabler said, "It's a form of humor that subverts media convention and reveals the pomposities and idiocies of politicians, but even more the pomposities and idiocies of the media that covers the politicians."
US authorities asked that the Boeing 777 carrying 263 people be diverted to Bangor, in the northeastern state of Maine, late Saturday after discovering that a passenger was on the list of people deemed a security risk.
The ICRC, which visits prisons around the world to monitor the condition and treatment of prisoners, told The Associated Press that it had repeatedly visited Britain's sole detention facility in Iraq, near the southern city of Basra.
"Our religion Islam does not allow us to harm the innocent," said the Muslim Council of Britain's Iqbal Sacranie in the leaflet.
Do more to educate each other about the facts of infection and how to prevent it," he told the London book launch.
-- was a clever evisceration both of the shallowness of campaign spin and of the news media's capacity for buying that spin, and ran on Comedy Central the same evening when the campaign spin doctors were earnestly toiling away on other networks.
The singer, who gave up his successful pop career in the late 1970s and converted to Islam, was deported back to Britain after being denied entry into the United States on "security grounds."
The singer, who gave up his successful pop career in the late 1970s and converted to Islam, was deported back to Britain after being denied entry into the United States on security concerns.
The form of news satire on "The Daily Show" is more sophisticated, mocking not just the style of the news but the conventions of journalism; for example, the mainstream news media's fixation with fairness.
"They're the basement of the program, and the floor is rotten."
Although he is coy about his politics, Stewart seems to relish mocking conservatives more than liberals, and at his studio on Thursday night, the crowd of people in their 20s, divided almost evenly between men and women, made no secret of their distaste for President Bush while watching the debate on monitors before the show began.
The whole thing is totally ridiculous," said Islam, who had a string of hits in the 1960s and '70s, but abandoned his music career after converting to Islam.
"The parody of the style becomes a joke in and of itself."
The bookmaker William Hill tipped the song Wednesday as the 7-1 favorite to become the Christmas No 1, it added.
And, don't mistake the trio for "Christian rockers," as critics and industry execs in the past have tried to tag them.
The television era has produced a steady supply of news spoofs like "Not Necessarily the News," "That Was the Week That Was" and "Weekend Update" on "Saturday Night Live."
Let down, perhaps, by the mainstream media, 21 percent of people under 30 say they are learning about the campaign from satirical sources like "The Daily Show" and the late-night television monologues, up from 9 percent in 2000, according to a Pew Research Center study released in January.
In 2002, the brothers hit the big time with the release of "Wonder What's Next" and its chart-topping single, "Send the Pain Below."
The singer, now named Yusuf Islam, is expected to attend the ceremony on Rome's Capitoline Hill on Wednesday, said Enzo Cursio, a spokesman for the Gorbachev Foundation.
"You don't have to start by saying to the audience, 'See, there was this singer-songwriter from the '70s named Cat Stevens,"' he said.
Britain has complained to the United States about the treatment, and Islam has said he plans legal action against U.S. authorities.
The flight was diverted to Bangor, in the northeastern state of Maine, late Saturday, said Transportation Security Administration spokeswoman Yolanda Clark.
Midway through live analysis of the presidential debate on "The Daily Show" on Thursday night, the host, Jon Stewart, called on his "correspondents" in the field for some in-depth analysis.
"There's some weird handcuffs on the mainstream news so that they feel that no matter what, they have to present both sides of the argument, even if one side of an argument is wrong," Karlin said.
In September, the British musician was expelled from the United States after authorities diverted his London-to-Washington flight to Maine to remove him, saying he was suspected of ties to terrorism.
Rocca's antics on "Larry King Live" during the conventions this summer, while occasionally funny, only highlighted the staid nature of the broadcast, and for his part, King seemed not to know how to react, other than to laugh a bit too zealously at Rocca's wisecracks.
Mo Rocca, formerly of "The Daily Show," played the role of wisecracking on-air correspondent for "Larry King Live" during the political conventions.
When it comes to the intense rock of Chevelle, don't confuse the band's roiling energy with anger.
The International Committee of the Red Cross insisted Friday that Britain does not hold any women prisoners in Iraq, although the demand of militants holding a British man hostage is that female prisoners be freed.
Yusuf Islam, 56, who sold 50 million records in the 1960s and 1970s, has recorded a version of his 1970 hit "Father and Son" with Ronan Keating, the Irish former boy-band star, The Times newspaper reported Thursday.
For one thing, he said, the audience could not possibly get the jokes if it did not already know the news stories that were being spoofed.
The latest evidence of the shift: "America (The Book)" by Stewart and "Daily Show" colleagues, a spoof of a civics textbook, will appear as No.
The ceremony Wednesday will mark the opening of the fifth reunion of Nobel Peace Prize laureates, a meeting organized every year in Rome by the Gorbachev Foundation.
Asked about the politics of writers for "The Daily Show," Ben Karlin, the executive producer, insisted, "We have no agenda other than holding on to our cushy, high-paying, basic cable jobs."
But the airlines don't have access to everyone who's considered a threat to aviation because some of the names of known or suspected terrorists are classified.
US Customs officials took the passenger into custody, as well as a person who was traveling with the passenger on the no-fly list, Clark said.
My job is to spend half the time repeating what one side says, and half the time repeating the other.
Hutchinson recalled that US authorities were preparing to test a new system dubbed "Secure Flight" that will allow them to compare the list of passengers with the no-fly list.
"And Rob, what's the mood at the Bush camp?"
That was among recommendations of the commission that investigated the Sept. 11 attacks.
Fake news is certainly the comic trope of the moment.
Under the current system, the government shares parts of the watchlists with airlines, which are responsible for making sure suspected terrorists don't get on planes.
He added that the number of people barred from entering the United States has sharply increased.
Islam will receive the award from Rome Mayor Walter Veltroni and Gorbachev, the spokesman said.
Mark Twain wrote fake news stories, and they were a staple of The National Lampoon in the 1970s.
The 86-year-old Mandela, wearing 46664 on a black shirt, oversaw the launch of the book "46664: The Concert", a book of photographs taken at an AIDS benefit concert last year.
Ronan asked him to do the duet and he said yes."
"We want the airlines to be more diligent about doing the checks," US Under Secretary for Border and Transportation Security Asa Hutchinson said after a meeting with EU officials.
Mandela, the world's most respected statesman, is also fighting legally to keep his name and his number from being used by businesses that have nothing to do with him or the AIDS campaign.
The government's first attempt was scuttled because of fears the government would have access to too much personal information.
"Secure Flight represents a significant step in securing domestic air travel and safeguarding national security information, namely, the watchlists," the TSA said in a notice announcing the order.
Puzzled and angry at being barred from the United States, Yusuf Islam, the singer formerly known as Cat Stevens, returned to London vowing to find out why.
According to his Web site, the singer was last in the United States two months ago with his record company.
Comedy Central mocked CNN's motto -- "The most trusted name in news" -- and Walter Cronkite's onetime reputation (as America's most trusted man) on a billboard during the Republican National Convention, which proclaimed "The Daily Show" as "the most trusted name in fake news."
On the Net:
The phony newspaper The Onion is expanding its print operation to new cities.
On its most basic level, news satire derives its humor from the juxtaposition of earnest newspeak and the absurd.
"This is big because there is this gigantic imbalance and something has got to fill it," said the cultural critic Neal Gabler, who is obsessed with "The Daily Show."
There still is no formal way for people mistakenly identified as terrorists, or who have the same name as a suspected terrorist, to get off the lists.
A spokesman for Keating told The Times: "They first met ten years ago when Boyzone performed 'Father and Son' on 'Top Of The Pops' (on BBC television) and stayed in touch.
"Yusuf Islam has been placed on the watch lists because of activities that could potentially be related to terrorism," Doyle said.
The hyped-up news cycle has been a boon to the fake news racket.
"Young people get the attitude, the deflationary truth-telling attitude of these shows because they can't find it elsewhere," he said.
"We hope many of the issues will be successfully addressed during the test phase of Secure Flight."
The Foreign Office said Friday that leaflets had been distributed in the streets around 28 mosques in Baghdad.
Benigni is the director of the Oscar-winning "Life is Beautiful."
Mandela has lent his prison number 46664 to AIDS campaigns, for the first time last November at the rock concert in Cape Town.
The Islamic militants claiming responsibility for Bigley's abduction have demanded the release of female Iraqi prisoners.
But even the satirists themselves confess to being surprised by the sudden market for their craft.
The agency said, however, it will test the passenger information "on a very limited basis" against commercial data.
"This book is a record of that amazing night... that raised awareness and inspired the fight against AIDS," the Nobel peace prize winner told a London audience.
"The idea that we give the guilty an equal opportunity to defend themselves -- we have no idea why."
He was joined at the event by British music stars Annie Lennox, Brian May from the group Queen, Peter Gabriel and Yusuf Islam, formerly known as Cat Stevens.
Justin Oberman, who heads the TSA office that's developing Secure Flight, said the agency will set up a passenger advocate's office to handle complaint from passengers.
The lists are "a hodgepodge of information, accurate and inaccurate," Steinhardt said.
An airline industry representative said the carriers support the government's goals but remain wary of privacy concerns.
The government has sought to improve its process for checking passengers since the Sept. 11, 2001, hijackers exposed holes.
Besides "The Daily Show," Ali G uses the news talk show format to absurd ends, mocking politicians, celebrities and panels of self-proclaimed experts.
"It's perfectly appropriate on mainstream news shows now to have a satirist in the mix."
Oberman said the TSA will present the final plan for Secure Flight early next year.
In issuing the order, the TSA didn't resolve another key concern for privacy advocates: redress.
People within the commercial aviation industry say there are more than 100,000 names on the lists.
The TSA says Secure Flight differs from the previous plan because it does not compare personal data with commercial databases.
Barry Steinhardt, an American Civil Liberties Union lawyer, said a major problem is the lists include the names of many people who are not security risks.
Sidani said the ICRC did not have any contacts with the militant group, controlled by Jordanian terror mastermind Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, believed to be holding Bigley.
the reporter responded.
"Triumph, Jon," the correspondent said.
Mandela's foundation recently discovered, when trying to obtain a telephone number with the 46664 digits, that a Johannesburg-based coin dealer Investgold ICC had already beaten them to the punch.
The ABC news magazine "Prime Time Live" recently began closing the program with a two-minute musical rendition of satirical headlines.
But when pressed, most say their opening has come because of a polarized electorate that suspects the media of doing the other side's bidding, coupled with high-profile journalistic scandals.
On one fake newscast, Stewart asked a correspondent in the field for his opinion on the Swift Boat veterans claims against Sen. John Kerry.
They are pieces of the same puzzle."
The ICRC added that it was ready to act as a mediator to help free Kenneth Bigley.
"Not only governments and the drug companies, but we too have a responsibility to act.
During a visit in May he met with officials of the White House Office of Faith-Based and Community Initiatives "to talk about philanthropic work," according to White House spokeswoman Claire Buchan.
"Today I spent an hour on Court TV talking about the Peterson case, and I don't know anything about the Peterson case," Borowitz said on Wednesday.
A statement on Islam's Web site said he was seeking further information from U.S. authorities "so that we can challenge the decision to refuse him entry."
"In comedy parlance that was called the set-up.
"People are getting their news from the tops of taxi cabs, from sluglines on Yahoo and from accidentally stopping on CNN," he said.
The exchange -- which ended with the Bush campaign "correspondent" pleading "You gotta re-elect him!"
The reunion ends Friday.
8 on the Billboard 200 album chart.
"We urge you to please listen to this appeal and release this man back into the arms of his waiting family."
The British government said more than 100,000 leaflets had been distributed in Baghdad containing a personal plea from Bigley's family and an appeal to his captors to release him.
Just to make sure there was no misunderstanding, during a commercial break, Stewart offered a reminder to the guffawing audience in his studio on West 54th Street.
Cat Stevens, who abandoned his music career when he converted to Islam and changed his name to Yusuf Islam 30 years ago, is making a surprise comeback with a single that could top the charts at Christmas.
British Foreign Secretary Jack Straw complained Wednesday to U.S. officials about their treatment of Islam, telling U.S. Secretary of State Colin Powell "that this action should not have been taken," the Foreign Office said.
The band -- Sam, 29, mans the drums, and Pete, 27, handles guitars and vocals -- ripped through local clubs for four years before releasing its debut album, "Point .1."
Now you can go straight to the punch line."
"And if there's one thing that everyone can agree on, it's that, right or wrong, they hate the press."
Islams recent journey to Nashville, curtailed by the US authorities, was to discuss plans for a new album.
"Nothing is more serious and pompous than a network news anchor or the earnest prose style of a newspaper," Borowitz said.
As for the Pew study crediting shows like his for teaching a fifth of young Americans about politics, Karlin said he was dubious.
A second government official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said U.S. authorities think donations from Islam may have ended up helping to fund blind sheik Omar Abdel-Rahman, convicted for a plot to bomb New York City landmarks, and Hamas, a Palestinian militant group considered a terrorist organization by the United States.
"The one positive thing I can say is that a lot of security officers are pleased because they got my autograph," he said.
"Ecstatic, Jon," came the response.
U.S. authorities provided few details about Islam's alleged connection to terrorism or when he was added to the watch list.
Time magazine reported that Islam's deportation was caused by a spelling mixup over the name of "Yusuf Islam" on his passport and a certain "Youssouf Islam" who is on US watch lists.
"U.S. airlines have long-standing concerns that center on privacy and operational issues," said James May, president of the Air Transport Association, which represents major airlines.
All of which begs the question: What are programs like "Larry King Live" and "Prime Time Live" hoping to accomplish by bringing news satirists on board?
South Africa's first black president from 1994 to 1999, Mandela has also built a charity empire that includes his Nelson Mandela Foundation and two other smaller organizations, the Nelson Mandela Children's Fund and the Mandela Rhodes scholarship foundation.
Like its predecessors, it carries rich melodies dotted by guitar riffs and lyrics that probe issues from Ritalin use to the incessant demands of society -- lyrics some see as dark.
"Ed, how are the Kerry people feeling?"
Under the system, called "Secure Flight," the Transportation Security Administration will compare passenger data with names on two government watch lists: a "no-fly" list comprises known or suspected terrorists, and a "watch" list names people who should face tighter scrutiny before boarding planes.
Of course no self-respecting satirist would take credit for anything so profound as affecting the political discourse, or even to having a political point of view.
When Cat Stevens was barred from entering the country late last month after showing up on a terrorist watch list, Borowitz said he sat down to write a fake news story about it.
Their man faced off against John Kerry, a golden-tongued virtuoso of words and captain of the Yale debate team.
___
powerful.
___
1 on the New York Times nonfiction best-seller list of Oct. 10.
"The idea that you could have a career as a prose satirist.
The British government has repeatedly stressed that it does not hold any.
It was not clear whether Straw meant Islam's detention, or his inclusion on the watch list.
The latest offering, "This Type of Thinking (Could Do Us In)" came out in late September and peaked -- so far -- at No.
The singer once known as Cat Stevens, now a peace activist whose name was on a U.S. list of people suspected of having terrorist links, will receive a peace prize from a foundation headed by former Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev, organizers said Monday.
On the Net, http://www.yusufislam.org.uk
He devoted himself to creating single-faith Islamic schools in Britain but denies delivering funds to the Islamic militant group Hamas in Israel.
(Kevin O'Horan writes for the Herald-Tribune in Sarasota, Fla.)
He is writing a Broadway musical based on his hits and sang at a charity concert at the Royal Albert Hall in London, his first live appearance in 25 years.
The latter can indicate a passenger's religion or ethnicity.
Other recipients of the "Man for Peace" award include Italian actor-director Roberto Benigni, who won in 2002.
The move was expected but nonetheless brought protests from civil libertarians worried about invasions of privacy.
Islam's United Airlines flight to Dulles International Airport was diverted to Maine's Bangor International Airport when U.S. officials reviewing the passenger list discovered he was aboard.
The Boeing 777 had 263 passengers on board, an Air France spokeswoman said.
"People are hungry for some sort of attitude and guidance through an ocean of spin," he said.
"It's pretty cheesy, but the thread is, it's good music," Loeffler said.
The flight landed in Maine at 5:30 pm (2000 GMT) and headed back to Washington's Dulles International Airport two hours later, Clark added.
The government ordered U.S. airlines Friday to turn over personal information about passengers so it can test a system for identifying potential terrorists.
Islam was deported from the United States last month after being denied entry on "security grounds" and was released without charge.
"Half of me wants to smile, and half of me wants to growl.
Under Secure Flight, the government would take responsibility for checking passengers.
"We have repeatedly visited Shaiba, the only British detention place in Iraq.
He avoided recording secular music, believing mistakenly, he now admits, that it was forbidden by the Koran.
"It's not like we're a freakin' hardcore band, with the repetitive screaming.
There are no women detained there," said Rana Sidani at the ICRC in Geneva, Switzerland.
He says he was a victim of an "unjust and arbitrary system," and that he has denounced terrorism.
And there's no need to, he added.
"A lot of those artists -- Cat Stevens and Sinead and Helmet -- that's emotion.
The humorist Andy Borowitz files daily stories in perfect news-service deadpan on his Web site, www.BorowitzReport.com.
That's not dark to me.
They contained messages from Bigley's family and from prominent British Muslims, including Yusuf Islam, the singer once known as Cat Stevens.
And in a strange turnabout, mainstream news outlets have been clamoring to introduce news satire to their programming, never mind that mainstream news is often what is being mocked.
The TSA order gives 72 airlines until Nov. 23 to turn over computerized data for passengers who traveled on domestic flights during June.
"Good music doesn't have to have a name on it," Loeffler said.
He said he was bound for Nashville to "initiate some recordings."
The fact is that every HIV infection can be prevented and every AIDS case can be treated."
He converted to Islam after nearly drowning in California in 1976.
That, and passion.
US authorities diverted a Washington-bound Air France flight after discovering that a passenger was part of a "no-fly" list of people deemed a security risk, a US security official said Sunday.
Homeland Security spokesman Brian Doyle would only say that the intelligence community has recently obtained information that "further heightens concern" about Islam.
"When I got out of school everyone wanted to write for sitcoms," Borowitz said.
There's got to be a whole lot of explanation."
Or, for that matter, any "type" of rocker.
Once they have the audience's sympathies, fake news purveyors have a simple task: be funny.
A similar incident involving British singer and peace activist Yusuf Islam, formerly known as Cat Stevens, occurred in September, when his Washington-bound flight from London was diverted to Bangor.
"Music is so much feeling and emotion," he said.
"Television newscasts are so calcified and rigid, any departure from that is exhilarating," he said.
The U.S. military says it has two Iraqi women in custody _ Rihab Rashid Taha, a scientist who became known as "Dr. Germ" for helping Iraq make weapons with anthrax, and Huda Salih Mahdi Ammash, a biotech researcher dubbed "Mrs.
US authorities on Monday urged airlines to step up their passenger security checks, after a Washington-bound Air France flight from Paris was diverted when US officials learned that a passenger was in their "no-fly" list.
For his part Rocca said he considered his satirical bits a kind of public service.
A similar incident involving British singer Yusuf Islam, formerly known as Cat Stevens, occurred in September, when his Washington-bound flight from London was diverted to Bangor.
"Fox supplies it in one way, and Jon Stewart in another.
Nelson Mandela, South Africa's former president and apartheid hero, donned his former prison identification number 46664 on Thursday for a fundraising event aimed at fighting the AIDS/HIV epidemic.
"And five minutes of good satire is a lot more useful than an hour on J.Lo's baby shower."
And Borowitz is a regular on CNN and appears alongside straight-faced legal experts on Court TV.
Islam, who was traveling with his 21-year-old daughter, Maymanah, told reporters in London he was treated well by FBI agents.
"With us, really, there's no label you can apply; it's so difficult to."
We'll see," he said.
Islam said he had been well treated by U.S. officials.
And what links such an eclectic mix to Chevelle?
Satirists, perhaps not surprisingly, are loath to talk earnestly about what they do; Stewart is particularly averse to speaking seriously about humor.
"It's kind of frustrating, because we deal with it so much.
It's hard to imagine that even five years ago."
For one thing, there is a steady flow of new material.
He said a process of redress wasn't needed until Secure Flight begins.
As Cat Stevens, Islam enjoyed a string of hits including "Wild World" and "Moonshadow."
News satire of course is a time-tested gag.
"Remember," he said gravely.
"From our side, it's not dark," Loeffler said.
"My favorite artist, probably because of her stability, in doing what she tries to do record after record, is Enya," said Joe Loeffler, 24.
Islam has known Keating, a former member of Boyzone, for a decade.
"It's not only a label we didn't want, it's untrue," Joe Loeffler, bassist and vocalist, said by phone recently.
The data _ known as passenger name records, or PNR _ can include credit card numbers, travel itineraries, addresses, telephone numbers and meal requests.
"A well-told joke that has a Republican target, if it's clever enough, gets Republicans to laugh too," Rocca said.
Among those subjected to extra scrutiny in recent months was Sen. Edward M. Kennedy.
"If we did not have this position there would be many, many more people who would be kidnapped, and the world would be less safe," Straw told British Broadcasting Corp. television.
"It represents a healthy society," she said.
It's not crap; writing 'happy' songs for people.
"We stand ready if we are contacted to mediate," she added.
"That sounds cheesy, but it's true."
Foreign Secretary Jack Straw said Thursday that Britain would not pay a ransom or meet any political demands to secure Bigley's release.
Each of us must do more.
Everybody knows my campaigning for charity, for peace.
"It's a serious matter."
It's making music with emotion."
"OK," Stewart said.
"We are not actual newspeople."
Little thing called objectivity; might want to look it up."
Some songs are angry; some are more kind of emotional.
Chevelle has been living by that simple creed since first forming in Chicago in 1995.
And for another, a more informed public means a bigger potential audience.
"It seems like energy, like
"I don't have opinions.
(Borowitz came up with "Angry Cat Stevens Vows to Resume Singing: Broadcasts Threat on Al-Jazeera.")
Don't mistake introspection for depression.
"We are all leaders now, and good leaders must lead.
Both are reactions to distorted objectivity, what I call a phony objectivity.
I don't think we're very angry."
"Kerry's people couldn't be happier.
Just as well.
Islam has denied supporting terrorist organisations.
Bigley, an engineer, was kidnapped two weeks ago in Baghdad along with two American colleagues who have since been beheaded.
Their candidate went up against a sitting war president who's never lost a debate and held his own."
"People make mistakes.
I'm a reporter, Jon.
I just hope they made a big mistake.
Rocca agreed.
(STORY CAN END HERE.
Transportation Security Administration: http://www.tsa.gov
"Everybody knows who I am.
I am no secret figure.
"My opinion?"
OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS.)
Anthrax."
Nor Christian rockers.
"Orgasmic triumph.