Jeff Nesmith's e-mail address is jeffn@coxnews.com
And now the gas is simply being dumped into the atmosphere, so a little returning to the surface poses no danger, Hovorka said.
For the next two weeks, trucks from Baytown and Louisiana will deliver compressed carbon dioxide to the site in Liberty County.
Using a modified oil well, the researchers will pump the gas into sandstone deposits 5,050 feet below ground.
There the gas -- so compressed it is almost a liquid -- soaks into the sandstone and saltwater, like bubbles in Coca-Cola, Hovorka said.
Among the team's concerns is that too much pressure may cause the shale layer atop the sandstone to crack, or might even cause a small earthquake.
But Hovorka said such problems can be solved by closely monitoring the pressure where the gas enters the ground.
As for leaks, the research team has calculated that just 1 percent of the gas will seep into the atmosphere after 300 years.
The group has chemically "tagged" the gas they are burying so they can measure if any returns to the surface in the coming weeks and months.
Even at relatively high concentrations, carbon dioxide is not harmful.
After all, anyone who drinks a carbonated beverage inhales it.
Environmentalists said the plan is worth pursuing.
The Kyoto Protocol's weak point is that even as wealthy nations cut back on pollution, greenhouse gas emissions from China, India and other developing nations keep rising at a sizzling rate.
"If it's something that can be done reliably and safely, then this is one way to mitigate against the impact of greenhouse gas emissions," said Ramon Alvarez, an atmospheric scientist in the Texas office of Environmental Defense.
Should burying the carbon dioxide below ground prove safe and reliable, the next hurdle will be cost, scientists say.
Removing carbon dioxide from fossil fuel fumes would be expensive, as would building the infrastructure to transport the gas below ground.
But Hovorka said the price tag would not be exorbitant.
For pennies on the dollar more than current electric rates, she said, people could use fossil fuels with cleaner air and consciences.
President Bush, in one of the least-noticed gestures of his European visit, has pledged to help developing nations such as China and India cut back on their fast-growing output of the greenhouse gases linked to global warming.
Bush signed a pact with German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder on Wednesday to help poorer countries adopt more energy-efficient technologies in power generation, transportation and industry.
Although the agreement lacked specific commitments for new spending, diplomats and analysts say it could help take political pressure off the United States, the world's largest polluter, and remove a major obstacle to achieving the goals set out in the Kyoto Protocol, the agreement on climate change that went into effect Feb. 16 despite a U.S. boycott.
The Bush-Schroeder agreement "can be very meaningful as a start.
The effort by UT geologists, in conjunction with scientists from other labs nationwide, is the first major attempt to determine whether the sandstone layer beneath the Texas and Louisiana coasts makes a good carbon dioxide reservoir.
Capturing a major chunk of those emissions, and storing them deep below ground, could ease global warming problems, scientists say, while giving the world time to move away from fossil-fuel dependency.
Annually, man-made sources of carbon dioxide emit 7 to 10 billion tons of the gas.
Norway has already buried nearly 70 million tons below the North Sea in the space where it had extracted fuels.
I want to get past that.''
Johnson took Congress to task for failing to ratify international environmental treaties that the United States has signed on to -- including the Persistent Organic Pollutant Treaty, which reduces or eliminates the production, use or release of 12 toxic chemicals.
The United States, a leader in pressing for the agreement, signed the treaty on May 23, 2001.
Congress has yet to ratify the pact.
He made no mention of the U.S. refusal to sign on to the Kyoto international agreement to restrict greenhouse gases, which took effect in 140 nations earlier this year.
Both Congress and President Bush have opposed it, advocating voluntary steps instead.
Noting that treaties can take years to negotiate and then ratify, Johnson said of the organic pollutant pact, ``Frankly, I don't want to wait.''
While he said he would prefer a legislative solution to a regulatory one, Johnson said he would forge ahead if Congress does not act -- as the EPA did in March in issuing a rule limiting mercury emissions from new and existing coal-fired power plants.
``We've got a Mercury problem internationally,'' Johnson said.
He said he hopes to share ``the very technologies that we're going to use in the United States for dealing with mercury control'' -- such as techniques called activated carbon injection or carbon sequestration -- with other countries that are contributing to the mercury problem, like China.
He also advocated bridging shortfalls in the U.S. energy supply with alternatives from nuclear to solar, and he foresaw the day when environmental requirements could be ``the driver'' of economic progress.
``We as a nation are facing significant shortfalls,'' he said.
``Either we at EPA can be a stumbling block or we can provide incentives.''
Some Texas geologists believe the best way to get rid of the carbon dioxide produced by burning fossil fuels is to simply put it back where it came from.
On Monday, scientists began burying 3,000 tons of compressed carbon dioxide 1 mile beneath an old oil field near Dayton.
If the plan works, most carbon dioxide -- a greenhouse gas -- could be captured from area smokestacks and stored harmlessly underground, not pumped into the atmosphere.
"We're going to test every aspect of this to determine whether it is safe," said lead researcher Susan Hovorka, with the University of Texas at Austin's Bureau of Economic Geology.
So-called carbon sequestration is not a new idea.
Scientists have experimented with storing the gas on the ocean floor and thousands of feet below ground.
It can get the United States and developing countries on board," said ZhongXiang Zhang, an energy and climate policy analyst at the East-West Center, a think tank in Honolulu.
China's emissions of carbon dioxide, the most common greenhouse gas, are rising at more than twice the rate of the United States, while Germany's overall output is dropping.
CO2 storage animation: www.statoil.com/statoilcom/svg00990.nsf/web/sleipneren?opendocument
The plant has been plagued by technical snafus and has never been fully operational.
If China, India and other nations start snapping up this new technology, a big winner could be San Francisco's Bechtel Corp., which has already built two coal-fired power plants and two nuclear plants in China, with several more under construction or projected.
Bechtel recently formed an alliance with General Electric Co. to develop IGCC power plants.
Amos Avidan, a principal vice president of Bechtel, said China is eager to make its power plants cleaner and reduce the nation's severe air pollution.
The IGCC technology "hasn't yet taken off," Avidan said, "but we believe it can become a mainstream technology in a couple of years or so and eliminate the cost gap.
We think it has great potential for China."
Other industry analysts are more skeptical.
"The problem with these leapfrog technologies is they have a well-proven track record of mostly failing," said Dale Simbeck, vice president of technology for SFA Pacific Inc., a Mountain View energy industry consulting firm.
He noted that there are only two IGCC power plants operating in the United States, despite two decades of federal subsidies.
One failed attempt was the Pinon Pine power plant, an IGCC plant near Reno completed in 2000 at a price tag of $335 million, split equally between a local power company and the U.S. Energy Department.
Simbeck, who has worked as a consultant on China power issues for the World Bank and the Chinese government, said China has enough technological know-how.
In fact, China is widely projected to overtake the United States as the world's top source of greenhouse gases by 2025.
Its main barrier, he said, is rigid government policies that shield state-owned power companies from competition.
"The Chinese are just telling the West what it wants -- 'Help us build with IGCC, please help fund these with our companies' -- but it's not necessary," he said.
Lee Schipper, director of transportation research for World Resources Institute in Washington, said China's reputation as a big polluter is unfair.
The Beijing government is spending billions of dollars annually on pollution prevention, he noted.
China's efficiency programs are getting a boost from European and Bay Area experts.
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory is working with the Energy Foundation on a host of programs, ranging from consumer appliance standards to building codes.
And the California Air Resources Board has helped Chinese federal and state governments set up air-quality monitoring programs.
"China is improving at many times the rate of improvement in the United States," Schipper said.
"The Bush administration should be getting its own carbon house in order instead."
"This amount would be a huge investment in global security, and it is very low compared to the $50 billion that the G-8 gave in development assistance last year," said David Hawkins, the council's climate policy director.
One prominent environmental group, the Natural Resources Defense Council in Washington, has estimated that the extra cost of using IGCC and carbon sequestration in all plants being built in developing nations would be just $6 billion a year.
What is needed now is not further research but aid to get these two methods to market, say Schroeder, Blair and many experts.
Plants built with this technology release 15 percent less carbon dioxide and can be combined with a futuristic option called "carbon sequestration," in which the carbon dioxide byproduct is injected into oil and gas aquifers underground, eliminating emissions altogether.
"China is building a new 1,000-megawatt power plant every week with old, Eisenhower-era technology," said Douglas Ogden, director of the China program at the Energy Foundation in San Francisco.
"They're going to keep building the oldest, dirtiest plants unless we do something.
The world can ill afford even one greenhouse gas producer on the U.S. scale, let alone two."
China and other developing nations are exempted from the Kyoto Protocol's rules for emission cutbacks because their governments are afraid the limits would hobble their rise from poverty.
"The European side wants hard targets from the United States and developing countries, which is ... very difficult," Zhang said.
"But if they can work together to subsidize advanced technologies ... it would be very positive."
The key to the U.S.-German initiative is the most polluting of major energy sources -- coal.
Schroeder and British Prime Minister Tony Blair are pressing Bush to join them in creating an ambitious aid program to help developing nations adopt new technologies that reduce emissions from coal power plants and save energy.
Blair holds the annual rotating presidency of the G-8, the group of industrialized nations, and he says he will make the proposal a top priority for the group's summit meeting in July.
Although environmentalists advocate the expansion of wind and solar energy production, China and India are expected to continue to rely on their huge reserves of coal for most of their energy needs in the near future.
The two countries derive 80 percent and 65 percent, respectively, of their electricity from coal, compared to the U.S. share of 51 percent.
"Coal is really the workhorse for the economies of India and China in the decades to come, so that's why coal is so important for global warming," said Bernd Kramer, minister counselor for science, technology and environment at the German Embassy in Washington.
In the next eight years, China expects to put into operation 562 coal-fired plants -- nearly half the world's total -- and India is projected to add 213 such plants, according to government figures.
The United States is expected to build only 72.
For years, the U.S. government has invested heavily in clean-energy research.
For 2005, it budgeted nearly $3 billion for research and development of climate-change technology, mostly through subsidies and tax breaks for work on hydrogen fuel-cell developments and so-called clean coal technology, which releases less carbon dioxide.
Hydrogen fuel cells are widely believed to be 15 to 20 years away from commercial viability, while clean-coal technology is already on the market.
The most prominent clean-coal method goes by the cumbersome name of Integrated Gasification Combined Cycle, or IGCC.
Under the process, coal is turned into a gas, which is then burned in a process that allows carbon dioxide to be siphoned off rather than released into the atmosphere.
``I don't want to waste time focusing on the rhetoric.
``I've heard it all,'' he said.
A native of Washington, D.C., Johnson said that after almost 25 years at the agency, he is well familiar with political rhetoric from the business and environmental communities as well as from Congress, the public and the press.
"First of all, are there enough geological deposits that can keep this gas out of the atmosphere for long enough to make a difference?
The government has committed 40 million pounds (60 million euros, 72 million dollars) for research on the technology, known as carbon sequestration, or carbon capture.
The method should be operational within a decade and could eventually prove a major export earner for Britain as other countries begin to adopt climate change-reducing techniques, Energy Minister Malcolm Wicks said.
The theory is that fossil fuel power stations, oil rigs and other energy burners would hold on to waste gases such as carbon dioxode and methane, rather than releasing them into the atmosphere.
Carbon dioxode and methane are among what are known as greenhouse gases, increased concentrations of which in the earth's atmosphere have been blamed by scientists for global warming.
Under the British plan, the captured gases would be pumped underground into spent oil and gas fields.
"Reaching our ambitious target of cutting carbon emissions by 60 percent by 2050 means action now to support emerging technologies that will enable us to burn coal and gas more cleanly," Wicks told BBC radio,
"At the same time, with major expansion of coal-fired power generation expected in China and India, we want to put the UK at the forefront of what could be a valuable new export opportunity."
Carbon capture could reduce emissions from power plants by up to 85 percent, he added.
Tony Juniper, director of environmental group Friends of the Earth, welcomed the initiative but warned there were "many challenges" ahead.
Can we get it there effectively?
``Why aren't we focusing on making that a reality rather than the rhetoric of global climate change?''
Can we transport it in a way that is technically feasible?"
he told BBC radio.
"And then, of course, what is going to be the cost of implementing this technology?"
British Prime Minister Tony Blair has pledged to make tackling climate change one of the main priorities of next month's summit of the Group of Eight (G8) rich nations' club in Gleneagles, Scotland.
The G8 on Friday declared climate change a "serious and long-term challenge," pointed a finger of blame at fossil fuels and looked to smart technology and cooperation with big emerging economies to tackle the problem.
"Climate change is a serious and long-term challenge that has the potential to affect every part of the globe," the world's eight most powerful countries said in a declaration here at the end of their three-day summit.
"We know that increased need and use of energy from fossil fuels, and other human activities, contribute in large part to increases in greenhouse gases associated with the warming of our Earth's surface."
"We know enough to act now to put ourselves on a path to slow and, as the science justifies, stop and then reverse the growth of greenhouse gases," they said, pledging to act "with resolve and urgency."
The declaration was issued by the Group of Eight along with a "Gleneagles Plan of Action" for combatting global warming and promoting clean energy.
Britain is to study whether global warming can be curbed by "capturing" carbon dioxode from power stations and storing it underground in old oil and gas fields, ministers said Tuesday.
The three-day conference, ending in this southwestern city on Thursday, focussed on scientists' latest assessment of the global warming problem.
During the same period, world electricity demand is projected to double, with fossil fuels supplying most of the need.
By growing plants, burning them in fossil-fuel power stations and then sequestrating and storing the carbon, a dent could be made on ors would increase by 62 percent.
But a top scientific forum here shows how far the argument for carbon sequestration has come, with a series of experts insisting it can be transformed from fiction to fact.
Driving their case is the fear that time is running out for dealing cheaply with the carbon pollution spewed out by fossil fuels.
These emissions trap the Sun's heat and disrupt Earth's fragile climate system, with potentially catastrophic effects a few decades from now.
Their focus is on power stations which burn oil, gas and coal, and whose pollution is set to soar in coming years as China and India, the two world's most populous countries, meet surging needs for energy.
Sequestrators say carbon dioxide (CO2) would be captured using solvents, either before or after the fossil fuel is burned in the plant.
The CO2 would then be pumped out, sometimes over hundreds of kilometers (miles), to disused oil and gas fields up to one kilometer (3,250 feet) underground, and stored.
It would not be the miracle cure to global warming or switch off the dependence on fossil fuels that are the source of the problem, they admit.
Even so, "it can play a global role, making very large and very rapid reductions of CO2 emissions," Jon Gibbins of Imperial College London said on Thursday.
He pointed to a pilot scheme in the North Sea as proof of its feasibility.
An experiment in Norway's offshore field, Sleipner, has been storing a million tonnes of waste CO2 per year since 1996, pumping it 1,000 metres (3,250 feet) below a cap of shale and mudstone.
Another project is in North America, where CO2 is being extracted from a coalgas plant in Wyoming and pumped 300 kms (185 miles) to Weyburn, in Canada's Saskatchewan province, where it is stored in an empty underground chamber in a working oilfield.
Environmentalists say the answer to global warming is to slash emissions themselves and swiftly wean the world off dirty fossils and onto renewable sources and hydrogen.
They also warn that the stored carbon is simply a bequeathed hazard for future generations.
If the geological storage tank leaks or is breached by an earthquake the outpouring of CO2 would instantly damage the world's climate system.
Gibbins says former oil and gas fields in sedimentary basins, but also many types of water aquifers, are excellent options for safe storage: "We are looking at 90 percent retention [of the gas] for 1,000 years."
Taking out the CO2 from fuel is called "carbon neutral," in other words not adding further to emissions from that source.
But a more ambitious possibility is "carbon negative," or removing CO2 from the atmosphere.
That could be done by biofuels, suggests Peter Read, a professor at Massey University in New Zealand.
Plants suck CO2 out of the air as part of photosynthesis.
The two documents marked the club's greatest acknowledgement so far about the cause and scale of global warming, a phenomenon that has shifted from the wings to the centre of the world's political stage in less than a quarter-century.
And they succeeded in bridging a rift between the United States, the world's biggest single culprit for greenhouse gases, and the other G8 countries.
They have fought for more than four years as to whether a voluntary approach or binding caps on pollution emissions are the best way to tackle global warming.
BP said it expects that review to be completed in the second half of 2006, allowing a final investment decision to be made next year.
"This is an important and unique project configured at a scale that can offer significant progress in the provision of cleaner energy and the reduction of carbon dioxide emissions," said BP Chief Executive Lord Browne.
"For example, if applied to just 5 percent of the new electricity-generating capacity that the world is projected to require by 2050, such schemes would have the potential to reduce global carbon dioxide emissions by around 1 billion tons a year _ a material step in the challenge the world faces," he added.
In its March 2005 budget, the British government announced that it is examining the potential for new economic incentives to support the development of carbon capture and storage technologies and applications.
The BP-led project would convert natural gas to hydrogen and carbon dioxide gases, then use the hydrogen gas as fuel for a 350 megawatt power station near Peterhead, northern Scotland, and export the carbon dioxide to a North Sea oil reservoir for increased oil recovery and ultimate storage.
When fully operational, the project would be expected to capture and store around 1.3 million tons of carbon dioxide each year and provide 'carbon-free' electricity to the equivalent of a quarter of a million U.K. homes.
BP said the project would reduce the amount of carbon dioxide emitted to the atmosphere by the power generation by over 90 percent.
EPA Administrator Stephen L. Johnson predicted Wednesday that safeguarding the country's water supply -- both from terrorists and pollutants -- will be the environmental issue of the coming decades.
``I believe water, over the next decade and further, will be the environmental issue that we as a nation and, frankly, as a world will be facing,'' he said.
Keeping the nation's water safe and secure, he added, is ``an area of vulnerability for the United States and also an opportunity for us.''
The first scientist to head the agency, Johnson said that in addition to helping the Department of Homeland Security secure the water supply, he wanted to find economically viable solutions for the 10 percent of Americans whose drinking water is not healthy -- and for cities and municipalities facing huge bills to improve aging water treatment facilities.
In his first interview with reporters since being confirmed by the Senate last month, Johnson, a 54-year-old biologist and career official at the Environmental Protection Agency, also talked about controversies that recently have plagued the agency.
Asked about charges this week by an unnamed EPA scientist that the Bush administration had watered down reports about global climate change, Johnson talked about the need for good communications -- and sound science.
``We have a number of people inside the agency and across administrations that look at the documents to try to make sure that we are staying true to the science and at the same time communicating effectively,'' he said.
``And on any particular issue if the way it is said isn't your particular leaning or viewpoint, then you say `You've compromised the science,' or `You haven't done a good job of communicating.'
''
Conceding the existence of climate change but not ready to predicts its severity or its causes, Johnson said, ``My focus is on advancing technologies and achieving real results.''
He touted a program he called Methane to Market, which captures methane gases for energy use.
.
``The answer is going to be the technologies,'' he said.
If approved, the group plans to start operation of the project in 2009.
Initial engineering feasibility studies have been completed, BP said, and the partners are now working to confirm the economic viability of the project.
British Prime Minister Tony Blair hailed the compromise as a big step forward.
BP said the project, which would make use of a power station in northern Scotland and export the carbon dioxide to a North Sea oil reservoir, would require total capital investment of some US$600 million (euro497 million).
"If it isn't possible to bring America into the consensus on tackling the issue of climate change we will never ensure that the huge emerging economies, particularly those of China and India, who are going to consume more energy than any other part of the world, that they are part of a dialogue," Blair said.
"And if we cannot have America as part of the dialogue on climate change and if we can't have India and China as part of a dialogue there is no possibility of us succeeding in resolving this issue."
But the deal fell miles short of the demands from scientists and green groups.
They had demanded a deadline and a target for cuts in the fossil-fuel gases that are warming Earth's atmosphere and disrupting its climate system.
"Thanks to the Bush administration, the world's biggest polluters have given little hope to those already suffering from climate change, especially those in Africa who will be hit hardest," said WWF's Jennifer Morgan.
"Technology is important but without real targets to reduce greenhouse-gas emissions, it is simply not enough."
The summit called for investment in clean energy technology, such as hydrogen, gave only a passing encouragement for renewables but a flourish of verbal support for technologies that greens say are dangerous or untested.
These include "clean" coal and carbon sequestration, in which carbon dioxide gas is pumped into geological chambers and stored there, rather than released into the atmosphere when fossil fuels are burned in power stations.
The summit also said it noted efforts to sustain and update nuclear power in those G8 countries which have a commitment to nuclear plants.
References to the fast-growing mountain of scientific evidence, which say climate change is already happening and could be catastrophic, were absent.
And mentions of the "K word" -- the Kyoto Protocol -- were pared to a minimum in deference to the United States.
Talks on what happens after Kyoto runs out in 2012 start in November.
"Let's be very clear," said Blair.
"We were never to be able at this G8 to resolve disagreement over Kyoto nor to renegotiate a set of targets for countries in place of the Kyoto Protocol."
US President George W. Bush is implacably hostile to the UN pact, saying it would cripple the US economy by its demands to curb fossil-fuel pollution, and is unfair because China and India are not included in the targeted emissions cuts.
With that argument in mind, the summit declared it sought a "dialogue" with developing countries on tackling greenhouse gases that would be launched at a conference in Britain on November 1.
Over the past four years, scientists have sounded ever-louder warnings about global warming.
But these these alarms have run into political resistance and worries about the cost of greater energy efficiency and the switch to cleaner alternatives to fossil fuels.
Oil group BP PLC said Thursday it has formed a joint venture with ConocoPhillips, Shell Transport & Trading Co. and Scottish and Southern Energy to begin work on a project to generate "carbon-free" electricity from hydrogen.
Almost a decade ago, Tampa Electric opened an innovative power plant that turned coal, the most abundant but the dirtiest fossil fuel, into a relatively clean gas, which it burns to generate electricity.
Not only did the plant emit significantly less pollution than a conventional coal-fired power plant, but it was also 10 percent more efficient.
Hazel R. O'Leary, the secretary of energy at the time, went to the plant, situated between Tampa and Orlando, and praised it for ushering in a "new era for clean energy from coal."
The scientists have found that the arsenic tends to reside in shallow aquifers, and that deeper levels bear none of the deadly poison.
Cool temperatures, for example, lower the concentrations of oxygen 18, and thus, unusually low amounts of the atom in groundwater imply that the body of water arose long ago, during ice ages and cooler climatic eras.
A more exact way to determine age is to measure carbon 14, a radioactive isotope that water bears in minute quantities and that, with clocklike precision, steadily decays into other substances, allowing researchers to calculate the elapsed time.
Scientists have used such methods to address a humanitarian crisis in Bangladesh that the World Health Organization calls the "largest mass poisoning of a population in history."
Millions of people in Bangladesh, one of the world's poorest countries, drink arsenic-contaminated water, the poison gradually debilitating its victims before spawning cancers that kill them.
Good intentions lay behind this horror.
For decades, the government and aid groups had urged people to give up pond water, often a carrier of lethal disease, and instead to dig shallow wells.
But no one tested the aquifers for arsenic.
For years, the atomic energy agency and its isotope hydrologists, using the carbon 14 and oxygen 18 methods, have worked closely with the Bangladeshis to help them map aquifer mazes and identify safer water supplies.
The news is mixed.
In some cases, however, these deep aquifers have connections to the shallower ones, and pumping them out could draw in the contaminated water.
Air, soil and water naturally contain oxygen in two forms -- oxygen 16 and oxygen 18, which has two extra neutrons in its nucleus.
"So you can have water at 100 meters that is arsenic-free today, but could become polluted in the future," Aggarwal said.
He added that the teams have discovered even deeper waters that are unconnected to the surface and will probably stay pure.
But the isotope-dating methods show that these very deep aquifers are old and not undergoing renewal, calling for careful conservation.
"If you pump it out in a major way," he said, "it will hurt."
The flow of detailed hydrological information, he said, has been "a tremendous boost" to the government's understanding and has helped it make substantial changes in policy.
"Part of solving the problem," Aggarwal said, "is to understand its origin and extent."
Experts agree that hydrology will become even more important in the future, as growing water shortages intensify conflicts between states, whether or not they result in water wars.
Some analysts see clean water as poised to supplant oil as the world's most contested natural resource.
Burkart of the atomic energy agency said that reliable information about the hidden world of water could only help dissipate international tensions.
This is calculated in many ways.
A main goal of isotope hydrology is to discover the age of groundwater, defined as the last time it had contact with the atmosphere.
The stakes are high because areas of fossil water are vulnerable to quick depletion.
"We're trying to understand the recharge, so the countries can precisely gauge the best policies," he said.
Because it is heavier than oxygen 16, more is left behind when water evaporates.
As a result, seawater is rich in oxygen 18; rain and snow are relatively poor, and increasingly so the further inland they fall.
These gradients are echoed underground.
The tools of isotope hydrology let scientists see the differences, creating a window into the depths.
For instance, comparing samples from different wells can reveal if the groundwater mixes or becomes isolated in separate pools.
In Ethiopia, the International Atomic Energy Agency used such techniques to help a foundering project.
To supply water to the capital, Addis Ababa, the Ethiopians drilled 25 large wells, assuming that a not-too-distant river would renew the aquifer.
But when the pumping started, water levels fell much faster than predicted.
"They didn't understand the hydrology," Aggarwal recalled.
"They came to us for help."
In a two-day survey, the agency discovered little connection between the river and the wells, prompting an overhaul of the project that put new emphasis on judicious use.
Scientists have now mapped the speed and direction of the area's limited groundwater flow.
Ethiopia's reaction to the episode was to demand that its water scientists put greater emphasis on isotope hydrology, making it "a standard tool for the country," said Mohamed ElBaradei, the agency's director-general.
Over continents and wide lands, the study of isotope signatures can reveal if aquifers flow under national borders, helping neighbors collaborate on the intelligent use of scarce water.
That is just what the atomic energy agency is doing in the blistering heat of the Eastern Sahara desert, with Libya, Chad, Egypt and Sudan.
They have joined together to map the shared water resources of the Nubian aquifer, a vast subterranean body whose lobes range over nearly a million square miles, an area bigger than Iran and Iraq combined.
"We're trying to elucidate the connections," said Mokdad Maksoudi, an expert on African technical cooperation at the agency.
"Some parts of the aquifer are very old, with fossil water.
Some are recharged through the Nile.
"The more you know," he said, "the better."
SEARCH IS ON FOR A WAY TO TRAP PLANET-HEATING CARBON DIOXIDE Moving in Washington and financial categories for release Sunday, Aug. 21.
WASHINGTON -- With the world poised to generate huge volumes of carbon dioxide in the next 25 years, experts say the need to capture the planet-heating gas and store it in safe places is becoming urgent -- and increasingly feasible.
If a common rock called serpentine is ground and mixed with water and supercritical CO2 in a solution Chizmeshya likens to "dirty soda pop," the CO2 combines with the serpentine to form magnesium carbonate, or magnesite, he said.
The procedure would add $200 to the cost of using a ton of coal, but Chizmeshya said this is dramatically below the estimated cost when they started working on the system five years ago.
He and McKelvy said they believe they have the solution to a problem that could lower the cost even more.
The alternative approach of injecting the captured CO2 underground would not be a totally new technology.
In fact, the energy industry now injects compressed carbon dioxide into the ground to pressurize oil or gas reserves and make it easier to get the fuel out of the ground.
Also, Norway uses a deep below-ground disposal system for carbon dioxide removed from natural gas in a purification step.
Socolow said new technologies like carbon dioxide storage, sometimes called carbon sequestration, will not work unless society decides to put a price on simply venting the gas into the atmosphere.
"Investment in technology is, I think, necessary, but there will be no actual the large-scale implementation of the technology until it is cheaper to put it underground than to pay the tax to emit it," he said.
That would imply caps on emissions or a carbon tax, both of which have been non-starters with the Bush administration.
However, Energy Secretary Samuel Bodman recently announced that the government would spend $100 million on moving "sequestration technology from the laboratory to the field."
He said that would bring the country "a step closer to significantly reducing greenhouse gas emissions while maintaining the important role coal plays in America's energy mix."
Socolow said experts have calculated that the cost of pumping the gas into deep caverns would be about $25 a ton, or about $60 for every ton of coal.
By the time the cost is passed through the coal and power industries to the consumer, the cost of a kilowatt hour of electric power would probably go up 20 percent, or $40 on a $200 monthly home power bill, he said.
But that's too much, said Paul N. Cicio, executive director of the Industrial Energy Consumers of America.
"If my members' energy cost goes up 20 percent, they're out of business," he said.
He says his industry supports Bush administration initiatives to develop new technologies and energy efficiencies, but costly CO2 capture and storage efforts will work only if competing economies such as China and India do likewise.
John Topping, founder of the Climate Institute, an environmental organization devoted solely to climate change issues, agreed with Socolow and Pacala that a combination of strategies is urgently needed.
"We need to find ways to make renewable fuels and nuclear power more competitive, and to get these coal plants to start sequestering CO2, and to develop a clean hydrogen fuel system and do a lot of other things," he said.
"It may be a little bit here and a little bit there, but if something is not done soon, we're just going to be piddling into the wind," he added.
On the Web:
The mineral is stable for millions of years.
In one strategy, being explored by physicist Andrew Chizmeshya and chemist Michael McKelvy at Arizona State University, the supercritical CO2 would be combined with abundant surface rocks to form permanent carbonate compounds.
Using available technologies, carbon dioxide (CO2) can be captured and pumped into geologic formations deep underground, scientists say.
Several ways of storing the captured gas are being explored.
The technique might add as little as 25 cents to the cost of a gallon of gasoline or $40 a month to a typical residential electric bill, a Princeton University scientist estimates, and the cost would be expected to fall as innovations are developed.
A group at Arizona State University is investigating another approach, with estimated costs that are considerably higher but coming down.
It would involve combining CO2 with plentiful minerals to form substances that would be chemically stable for millions of years.
The cost of allowing the heat-trapping gas to remain in the atmosphere could be far higher.
Nearly all atmospheric scientists believe that increases in CO2 and other "greenhouse gases" have caused the Earth's surface temperature to rise.
Many fear the concentration is approaching the point known as "dangerous anthropogenic interference," when altered weather patterns, rising and acidified seas, and other unforeseen changes could bring about global havoc.
Nevertheless, projected economic growth over the next few decades imply drastic increases in the atmospheric concentrations of the dominant greenhouse gas, CO2, which is produced by the combustion of coal, petroleum and natural gas.
The scale of the imminent increases is illustrated by a United Nations projection that the amount of electricity produced in the world's coal-burning power plants will double between 2002 and 2030.
Robert H. Socolow of Princeton University has calculated that the pollution produced by these plants during those 28 years will include approximately 501 billion tons of CO2.
That's almost as much CO2 as scientists believe coal burning has vented into the air since the turn of the 17th century, the time of William Shakespeare.
"If we're going to build that many coal plants, we're going to make one hell of an impact on the planet," Socolow said.
"I think it's obvious that a substantial fraction of that carbon dioxide should not be allowed to enter the atmosphere."
Socolow and ecologist Stephen Pacala, co-directors of the Princeton Carbon Mitigation Initiative, say the world must move rapidly to develop a combination of strategies, from the use of carbon-free alternative energies to the capture and storage of CO2, in order to reduce the buildup of greenhouse gases.
Removing CO2 from power plant emissions is not as difficult as it might sound.
About 15 percent of the flue gas from a traditional coal-fired power plant is carbon dioxide, Socolow said.
If droplets of chemicals known as amines are sprayed through the flue gas in a chamber known as an absorption tower, the CO2 will stick to the amines, he said.
Then, under heat, the amine-CO2 combination breaks apart, freeing the amine chemical to be routed back into the absorption tower to collect more CO2.
The next step, Socolow said, is to compress the CO2 into what's called a "supercritical" fluid, almost as dense as water.
Socolow said a 1,000-megawatt coal plant would produce about 50 million barrels of supercritical carbon dioxide per year.
Oxygen 18 represents about 1 oxygen atom in every 500.
The raw material is everywhere.
Federal officials still refer to the plant's "integrated gasification combined cycle" process as a "core technology" for the future, especially because of its ability -- eventually -- to all but eliminate the greenhouse gases linked to global warming.
Disposing of the carbon dioxide gas stripped out in the process, however, is another matter.
The plants also need about 40 percent less water than conventional coal plants, a significant consideration in arid Western states.
But for some people, including Rogers and other utility leaders who anticipate stricter pollution limits, the primary virtue of integrated gasification combined-cycle plants is their ability to chemically strip pollutants from gasified coal more efficiently and cost-effectively, before it is burned, rather than trying to filter it out of exhaust.
Proponents say that half of coal's pollutants -- including sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides, which contribute to acid rain and smog -- can be chemically stripped out before combustion.
So can about 95 percent of the mercury in coal, at about a tenth the cost of trying to scrub it from exhaust gases racing up a smokestack.
The biggest long-term draw for gasification technology is its ability to capture carbon before combustion.
If greenhouse-gas limits are enacted, that job will be much harder and more expensive to do with conventional coal-fired plants.
Lowe, the GE executive, estimated that capturing carbon would add about 25 percent to the cost of electricity from a combined-cycle plant burning gasified coal, but that it would add 70 percent to the price of power from conventional plants.
Gasification technology, although new to the power sector, has been widely used in the chemical industry for decades, and the general manager of the gasification plant run by Tampa Electric, Mark Hornick, said it was not difficult to train his employees to run the plant.
Tampa Electric is the principal subsidiary of TECO Energy of Tampa.
Government laboratories have experimented with dissolving the gas in saline aquifers or pumping it into geologic formations under the sea.
"Isotopics let you do that in a cost-effective way."
The petroleum industry has long injected carbon dioxide into oil fields to help push more crude to the surface.
Refining and commercializing these techniques is a significant part of a $35 billion package of clean energy incentives that the National Commission on Energy Policy is recommending.
The Senate considered some of those ideas in a big energy policy bill last week, but it is doubtful whether Congress will approve the funds to enact them because they are tied to regulating carbon emissions for the first time, something that many industry leaders and sympathetic lawmakers oppose.
(STORY CAN END HERE.
OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS.)
Still, the energy bill may have some incentives for industry to adopt gasification technology, and the Department of Energy will continue related efforts.
These include FutureGen, a $950 million project to demonstrate gasification's full potential -- not just for power plants but as a source of low-carbon liquid fuels for cars and trucks as well, and, further out, as a source of hydrogen fuel.
Regardless of the politics of carbon caps, the Energy Department has made it clear that it intends to push the development of integrated gasification combined-cycle technology.
Last month, for example, Mark Maddox, a deputy assistant secretary, said at an industry gathering that the technology "is needed in the mix -- needed now."
The operating savings of such plants start with more efficient combustion: They make use of at least 15 percent more of the energy released by burning coal than conventional plants do, so less fuel is needed.
"I don't see any other way forward," he said.
"I'm making a bet on gasification," he said, because he assumes a carbon-constrained world is inevitable.
James E. Rogers, the chief executive of Cinergy, a heavily coal-dependent Midwestern utility, is one of the technology's biggest industry supporters.
Since that plant opened, however, not a single similar plant has been built in the United States.
Abundant supplies of natural gas -- a bit cleaner and, until recently, a lot cheaper -- stood in the way.
But even now, with gas prices following oil prices into the stratosphere and power companies turning back to coal, most new plants -- about nine out of 10 on the drawing board -- will not use integrated gasification combined-cycle technology.
The reason is fairly simple.
A plant with the low-pollution, high-efficiency technology demonstrated at the Tampa Electric plant is about 20 percent more expensive to build than a conventional plant that burns pulverized coal.
This complicates financing, especially in deregulated markets, while elsewhere utilities must persuade regulators to set aside their customary standard of requiring utilities to use their lowest-cost alternatives.
(A federal grant of $143 million covered about a fourth of the construction cost of the Tampa Electric plant, which was originally a demonstration project.)
The technology's main long-term advantage -- the ability to control greenhouse gas emissions -- is not winning over many utilities because the country does not yet regulate those gases.
That could be a problem for future national policy, critics say, because the plants being planned today will have a lifetime of a half-century or more.
"It's a very frightening specter that we are going to essentially lock down our carbon emissions for the next 50 years before we have another chance to think about it again," said Jason S. Grumet, the executive director of the National Commission on Energy Policy.
The commission, an independent, bipartisan advisory body, has recommended that the federal government spend an additional $4 billion over 10 years to speed the power industry's acceptance of the technology.
In a recent report, the commission concluded that "the future of coal and the success of greenhouse gas mitigation policies may well hinge to a large extent on whether this technology can be successfully commercialized and deployed over the next 20 years."
Grumet was more succinct.
Integrated gasification combined cycle technology, combined with the sequestration of carbon stripped out in the process, "is as close to a silver bullet as you're ever going to see," he said.
Until Congress regulates carbon emissions -- a move that many in the industry consider inevitable, but unlikely soon -- gasification technology will catch on only as its costs gradually come down.
Edward Lowe, general manager of gasification for GE Energy, a division of General Electric that works with Bechtel to build integrated gasification combined-cycle plants, said that would happen as more plants were built.
The premium should disappear entirely after the first dozen or so are completed, he added.
Even now, Lowe said, the technology offers operational cost savings that offset some of the higher construction costs.
And if Congress eventually does limit carbon emissions, as many utility executives say they expect it to do, the technology's operational advantages could make it a bargain.
Some industry leaders are skeptical, to say the least.
"We would not want to put all of our eggs in one basket as far as a single technology is concerned," said William Fang, deputy counsel for the Edison Electric Institute, a trade association whose members, shareholder-owned utilities, account for three-quarters of the country's generating capacity.
Besides, he added, many of his members think that mandatory carbon controls, in place in much of the world since the Kyoto Protocol came into force in February, can be kept at bay in the United States -- possibly indefinitely.
A little money goes a long way.
Still, that is enough to finance 84 projects in more than 50 countries, including Bangladesh, Costa Rica, Ethiopia, Morocco, and Senegal.
"If you look at the Middle East, everywhere you are using old water," said Pradeep Aggarwal, the head of the agency's isotope hydrology unit.
"It was laid down 10,000, maybe 100,000 years ago.
So you have to understand there's a limit to how long this will go."
After more than 25 years of cooperative work, the agency has gathered so much information that it is now fashioning a detailed portrait of the planet's water resources that could help prevent future crises and reduce regional friction that may erupt in water wars.
"We're talking about food security, sustainable development," Aggarwal said.
"If it's based on unsustainable water resources, you jeopardize everything."
(STORY CAN END HERE.
OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS.)
Oceans and seas constitute 97 percent of the planet's waters.
The remaining 3 percent is fresh water, most locked up as ice, soil moisture, and deep groundwater.
What is available to people -- mainly as rivers, lakes, aquifers, reservoirs and wetlands -- comes down to less than 1 percent.
Using that fresh water wisely requires considerable knowledge of the Earth's water cycle, the outlines of which are well known, centering on evaporation and rain, runoff and seepage.
But local riddles abound.
The puzzles can include how often a particular body of water is renewed, where it flows, and whether different bodies are physically linked through underground flows.
In the past, water engineers would address such unknowns by carefully measuring rain and the levels of rivers and other bodies of water for many decades -- typically a half-century or more.
It usually took that long to learn the subtleties of the local cycles.
However, isotope hydrology can do it in days, quickly illuminating water's passage through the depths.
"You really need to know how the water gets in and moves," said Aggarwal.
Each year, the isotope hydrology program spends only about $2 million on research and $5 million to aid developing states.
"They're building their own capacity to manage their own resources."
It's a risky strategy -- for industry and for the climate.
"We do a lot of capability building and training of local people, so it becomes sustainable -- so we don't have to inject support all the time," said Ana Maria Cetto, the agency's head of technical cooperation.
"Coal-fired plants are big targets," said Judi Greenwald of the Pew Center on Global Climate Change, "and if we do get serious about climate change, they are going to be on the list of things to do quite early."
The forecast, courtesy of the United Nations, is grim.
Today, more than a billion people lack access to safe drinking water.
Polluted water contributes, each year, to the death of about 15 million children under age 5.
By midcentury, between 2 billion and 7 billion people will face water shortages.
"No region will be spared from the impact of this crisis," Koichiro Matsuura, director general of Unesco, recently warned.
"Water supplies are falling while the demand is dramatically growing."
He estimated that in the next two decades the average amount of water available per person on the planet will shrink by a third.
But the United Nations is also working hard on solutions, helping poor countries learn a subtle art that lets them better manage their water resources to avoid tragedy.
The method is known as isotope hydrology.
Cheap and reliable, it takes advantage of the fact that water molecules carry unique fingerprints, based in part on differing proportions of the oxygen and hydrogen isotopes that constitute all water.
Isotopes are forms of the same element that have variable numbers of neutrons in their nuclei.
Using the tools of isotope hydrology, scientists can discover the age, origins, size, flow, and fate of a water source.
And that information, in turn, can guide sound water-use policy, letting water engineers better map underground aquifers, conserve supplies and control pollution.
For instance, if the method reveals that the water in a well is young and recently derived from rain, villagers can pump away vigorously.
But if it turns out to be very old -- what scientists call fossil water -- they need to move gingerly, taking care not to exhaust the water supply.
"You take it out once, like oil," Werner Burkart, head of the nuclear science programs of the International Atomic Energy Agency, said in an interview.
The U.N. group, best known for fighting the spread of nuclear arms, is leading the hydrology effort.
Based in Vienna, Austria, it works at developing techniques as well as sharing them with scientists around the world.
Less than a decade ago, the idea of capturing and storing the carbon gases blamed for driving the Earth towards climate-change peril was usually dismissed with a laugh.