A number of Pakistani scientists and officials had been detained for the proliferation scandal since Abdullah Q. Khan confessed for his wrong doing earlier this year.
Khan quickly led the agents to Beijing.
Years later, investigators discovered that he had taken blueprints for the centrifuges with him.
In Pakistan, Khan was working to develop a bomb to counter India's, and Washington was intent on stopping the project.
It later proved to be the first of several occasions when the United States failed to fully understand what Khan was up to.
Joseph Nye, a Harvard professor who has served in several administrations, said U.S. intelligence agencies thought Pakistan would try to make its bomb by producing plutonium -- an alternative bomb fuel.
Nye was sent to France to halt the shipment of technology that would have enabled Pakistan to complete a reprocessing plant for the plutonium fuel.
"We returned to Washington to celebrate our victory, only to discover that Khan had already stolen the technology for another path to the bomb," Nye recalled.
To gather more atomic gear and skill, Khan returned to the Netherlands repeatedly.
But the United States wanted to watch him, and a European diplomat with wide knowledge of nuclear intelligence cited the two occasions when the CIA persuaded the Dutch authorities not to arrest him.
Intelligence officials apparently felt Khan was more valuable as an unwitting guide to the nuclear underworld.
"The Dutch wanted to arrest him," the diplomat said.
"But they were told by the American CIA, 'Leave him so we can follow his trail."'
A CHINESE CONNECTION
It was there in the early 1980s that Khan pulled off a coup: obtaining the blueprints for a weapon that China had detonated in its fourth nuclear test, in 1966.
The spokesman said Pakistan has been cooperating well with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) on the nuclear proliferation control and there is no need to bring in the US aid in the sector.
The design was notable because it was compact and the first one China had developed that could easily fit atop a missile.
U.S. intelligence agencies only learned the full details of the transactions earlier this year when the Libyans handed over two large plastic bags with the names of an Islamabad tailor on one side and a dry-cleaner on other -- one of several clues that it had come from the Khan Laboratories.
The design inside included drawings of more than 100 parts, all fitting in a sphere about 34 inches in diameter, just the right size for a rocket.
Equally remarkable were the handwritten notations in the margins.
"They made reference to Chinese ministers, presumably involved in the deal," one official who reviewed it disclosed.
And there was also a reference to "Munir," apparently Munir Khan, Khan's rival who ran the Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission and was in a contest with Khan to put together a Pakistani weapon that would match India's.
In that race, size was critical, because only a small weapon could be put atop Pakistani missiles.
One note in the margin of the design, the official said, was that "Munir's bomb would be bigger."
Intelligence experts believe that Khan traded his centrifuge technology to the Chinese for their bomb design.
A certain familiarity developed between Khan and those watching him.
"I remember I was once in Beijing on a nonproliferation mission," said Robert J. Einhorn, a longtime proliferation official in the State Department, "and we knew that Khan was in Beijing, too, and where he was.
I had this fantasy of going over to his hotel, calling up to his room, and inviting him down for a cup of coffee."
Khan suddenly left the country that December, called home by his government for its atomic project.
"There was an awareness," said Frank Slijper of the Dutch Campaign against Arms Trade, who recently wrote a report on Khan's early days, "that he was a potential danger."
By late 1975, they grew so wary, after he was observed at a nuclear trade show in Switzerland asking suspicious questions, that they moved him to a different area of the company to keep him away from uranium enrichment work.
After he secured a job in the Netherlands in the early 1970s at a plant making centrifuges -- the devices that purify uranium -- Dutch intelligence officials began watching him.
The breadth of the operation was particularly surprising to some U.S. intelligence officials because they had had Khan under surveillance for nearly three decades, since he began assembling components for Pakistan's bomb, but apparently missed crucial transactions with countries like Iran and North Korea.
In fact, officials were so confident they had accurately taken his measure, that twice -- once in the late 1970s and again in the 1980s -- the CIA persuaded Dutch intelligence agents not to arrest Khan because they wanted to follow his trail, according to a senior European diplomat and a former congressional official who had access to intelligence information.
The CIA declined to comment.
"We knew a lot," said a nuclear intelligence official, "but we didn't realize the size of his universe."
President Bush boasts that the Khan network has been dismantled.
But there is evidence that parts of it live on, as do investigations in Washington and Vienna, Austria, where the IAEA is based.
Cooperation between the U.N. atomic agency and the United States has trickled to a near halt, particularly as the Bush administration tries to unseat the IAEA director general, Mohamed ElBaradei, who did not support the White House's prewar intelligence assessments on Iraq.
The chill from the White House has blown through Vienna.
"I can't remember the last time we saw anything of a classified nature from Washington," one of the agency's senior officials said.
Experts see it as a missed opportunity because the two sides have complementary strengths -- the United States with spy satellites and covert capabilities to intercept or disable nuclear equipment, and the IAEA with inspectors who have access to some of the world's most secretive atomic facilities that the United States cannot legally enter.
In the 11 months since Khan's partial confession, Pakistan has denied U.S. investigators access to him.
They have passed questions through the Pakistanis, but report that there is virtually no new information on critical questions like who else obtained the bomb design.
Nor have U.S. investigators been given access to Khan's chief operating officer, Buhari Sayed Abu Tahir, who is in a Malaysian jail.
This disjunction has helped to keep many questions about the network unanswered, including whether the Pakistani military was involved in the black market and what other countries, or nonstate groups, beyond Libya, Iran and North Korea, received what one Bush administration official called Khan's "nuclear starter kit" -- everything from centrifuge designs to raw uranium fuel to the blueprints for the bomb.
Privately, investigators say that with so many mysteries unsolved, they have little confidence that the illicit atomic marketplace has actually been shut down.
"It may be more like al-Qaida," said one IAEA official, "where you cut off the leadership but new elements emerge."
(STORY CAN END HERE.
OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS.)
A POTENTIAL DANGER
A.Q.
Khan may have been unknown to most Americans when he was revealed about a year ago as the mastermind of the largest illicit nuclear proliferation network in history.
But for three decades Khan, a metallurgist, has been well known to British and U.S. intelligence officials.
Even so, the United States and its allies passed up opportunities to stop him -- and apparently failed to detect that he had begun selling nuclear technology to Iran in the late 1980s.
It was the opening transaction for an enterprise that eventually spread to North Korea, Libya and beyond.
Khan studied in Pakistan and Europe.
Of course, he never did.
But if he had, Khan might not have been surprised.
Simon Henderson, a London-based author who has written about Khan for more than two decades, said the Pakistani scientist long suspected he was under close surveillance.
"I said to him, 'We know so much about this that we're going to go public with it,"' Secretary of State Colin L. Powell told journalists last week.
On television, Khan was forced to confess but he gave no specifics, and Musharraf pardoned the scientist.
U.S. officials pressed to interview him and his chief lieutenant, Tahir, a Sri Lankan businessman living in Dubai and Malaysia, who was eventually arrested by Malaysian authorities.
But the Pakistanis balked, insisting that they would pass questions to Khan and report back.
Little information has been conveyed.
"Some questions simply were never answered," said one senior intelligence official.
"In other cases, you don't know if you were getting Khan's answer, or the answer the government wanted you to hear."
Khan's silence has extended to the question of what countries, other than Libya, received the bomb design.
Intelligence experts say they have no evidence any other nation received the design, although they suspect Iran and perhaps North Korea.
But that search has been hampered by lack of hard intelligence.
"We strongly believe Iran did," said one U.S. official.
"But we need the proof."
Khan has also never discussed his ties with North Korea, a critical issue because the United States has alleged -- but cannot prove -- that North Korea has two nuclear arms programs, one using Khan technology.
"It is an unbelievable story, how this administration has given Pakistan a pass on the single worst case of proliferation in the past half-century," said Jack Pritchard, who worked for President Clinton and served as the State Department's special envoy to North Korea until he quit last year, partly in protest over Bush's Korea policy.
"We've given them a pass because of Musharraf's agreement to fight terrorism, and now there is some suggestion that the hunt for Osama is waning.
And what have we learned from Khan?
Nothing."
SOME MISSING PIECES
In March, U.S. investigators invited reporters to the giant nuclear complex in Oak Ridge to display the equipment disgorged by the Libyans.
They surrounded the site with guards bearing automatic weapons, and Energy Secretary Spencer Abraham joined the officials in showing off some of the 4,000 centrifuges.
"We've had a huge success," he said.But it turned out that the centrifuges were missing their rotors -- the high-speed internal device that makes them work.
To this day, it is not clear where those parts were coming from.
While some officials believe the Libyans were going to make their own, others fear the equipment had been shipped from an unknown location -- and that the network, while headless, is still alive.
John R. Bolton, the undersecretary of state for arms control and international security, echoed those suspicions, saying the network still had a number of undisclosed customers.
"There's more out there than we can discuss publicly," Bolton said in April.
Federal and private experts said the list of suspected customers includes Syria, Egypt, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Malaysia, Indonesia, Algeria, Kuwait, Myanmar and Abu Dhabi.
"'And you need to deal with this before you have to deal with it publicly."'
Pressures mounted on Musharraf.
"Khan once told me, indignantly, 'The British try to recruit members of my team as spies,"' Henderson recalled.
Within weeks, tons of equipment was being dismantled and flown to the Energy Department's nuclear weapons lab at Oak Ridge, Tenn.
"As far as I'm aware, he was penetrated for a long, long time."
Still, for all the surveillance, U.S. officials always seemed a step or two behind.
In the 1990s, noted Einhorn, the assumption was that Iran was getting most of its help from Russia, which was providing the country with reactors and laser-isotope technology.
Virtually no attention was paid to its contacts with Khan.
"It was a classic case of being focused in the wrong place," Einhorn said.
"And if Iran gets the bomb in the next few years, it won't be because of the Russians.
It will be because of the help they got from A.Q.
Khan."
TRIUMPH AND MYSTERY
As soon as Bush came to office, his director of central intelligence, George J. Tenet, began tutoring him on the dangers of Khan and disclosing how deeply the agency believed it had penetrated his life and network.
"We were inside his residence, inside his facilities, inside his rooms," Tenet said in a recent speech.
"We were everywhere these people were."
But acting on the Khan problem meant navigating the sensitivities of a fragile ally important in the effort against terrorism.
That has impeded the inquiry ever since.
Washington had little leverage to force Pakistan's president, Gen. Pervez Musharraf, to clamp down on a national hero, especially since Khan may have had evidence implicating the Pakistani government in some of the transactions.
And in interviews, officials said they feared that moving on Khan too early would hurt their chances to roll up the network.
Stephen J. Hadley, the deputy national security adviser, went to Pakistan soon after the Sept. 11 attacks and raised concerns about Khan, some of whose scientists were said to have met with Osama bin Laden, al-Qaida's leader.
But Hadley did not ask Musharraf to take action, according to a senior administration official.
He returned to Washington complaining that it was unclear whether the Khan Laboratories were operating with the complicity of the Pakistani military, or were controlled by freelancers, motivated by visions of profit or of spreading the bomb to Islamic nations.
The Pakistanis insisted they had no evidence of any proliferation at all, a claim U.S. officials said they found laughable.
As evidence grew in 2003, Bush sent Tenet to New York to meet with Musharraf.
"We were afraid Khan's operation was entering a new, more dangerous phase," said one top official.
Still there was little action.
But in late October 2003, the United States and its allies seized the BBC China, a freighter bearing centrifuge parts made in Malaysia, along with other products of Khan's network, all bound for Libya.
Confronted with the evidence, Libya finally agreed to surrender all of its nuclear program.
Having tracked the network operations to Malaysia, Europe and the Middle East, investigators recently uncovered an outpost in South Africa, where they seized 11 crates of equipment for enriching uranium.
In Dubai, they have scoured one of the network's front companies, finding traces of radioactive material as well as phone records showing contact with Saudi Arabia.
Investigators said he visited 18 countries, including Syria, Saudi Arabia and Egypt, on what they believed were business trips, either to buy materials like uranium ore or sell atomic goods.
Masood Khan said Pakistan had not received a report through formal channels on the claim, and it was open to "any communication."
Khan has been under virtual house arrest in Islamabad since a scandal broke in December over his alleged black market dealings that supplied nuclear weapons technology to Iran, North Korea and Libya.
President Gen. Pervez Musharraf pardoned Khan _ long revered in Pakistan for helping build a nuclear deterrent against rival India _ after he made a public confession in February.
All but one of Khan's colleagues have been released after questioning.
Pakistan has defended its efforts to halt leaks of nuclear technology amid suggestions that Iran's nuclear weapons program received more help from a renegade Pakistani scientist than previously disclosed.
The CIA _ which provides the U.S. Congress with six-monthly updates on reported efforts by Iran, Iraq, Libya, North Korea and Syria to obtain chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear weapons technology _ posted an unclassified version on its Web site this week.
Analyzing the report, The New York Times said it indicates that bomb-making designs provided by Abdul Qadeer Khan to Iran in the 1990s were more significant than Washington has said.
Pakistan Foreign Office spokesman Masood Khan criticized the Times report, saying it was "based on flimsy evidence, hearsay and snippets of conversations.
"The CIA report does not mention any 'designs for weapons or bomb-making components.'
Weapons and bomb-making are the writer's own creative insertions," the spokesman said Saturday.
"In the past year, Pakistan has conducted an inquiry to unearth an illicit network of international black-marketeers, dismantled it and shared the results of the inquiry transparently with the people of Pakistan.
"Pakistan has been cooperating with the IAEA and the international community to thwart international black-marketeers from proliferating sensitive nuclear technology," Masood Khan said.
The International Atomic Energy Agency _ the United Nations' nuclear watchdog _ has been investigating Iran's nuclear activities for about 18 months, but the agency remains unable to determine if nearly two decades of Iranian nuclear activities were purely peaceful or if the government had a secret weapons agenda.
Tehran says its activities were for generating electricity, while the United States says they were for making weapons.
Iran and European negotiators have reached a tentative compromise committing Tehran to freeze all uranium enrichment activities, diplomats say, but the Iranian government still must approve the deal.
A.Q.
Khan, considered a national hero for leading the development of Pakistan's nuclear deterrent, admitted in February to passing nuclear technology to other countries.
He was pardoned by President Gen. Pervez Musharraf, who cited his service to the nation, but remains under virtual house arrest in Islamabad.
"Iran's nuclear program received significant assistance in the past from the proliferation network headed by Pakistani scientist A.Q.
Khan," the CIA report said.
"The A.Q.
Khan network provided Iran with designs for Pakistan's older centrifuges as well as designs for more advanced and efficient models and components."
It said Libya disclosed receiving similar assistance from Khan, head of Pakistan's nuclear program from the 1970s until 2001.
"Even in cases where states took action to stem such transfers, knowledgeable individuals or non-state purveyors of WMD- and missile-related materials and technology could act outside government constraints," the report said.
The Times focused on the phrase "designs for more advanced and efficient models, and components," indicating that "components" refers to weapons components.
The Times said American officials have publicly referred only to the role of A.Q.
Pakistan has said it is cooperating with the International Atomic Energy Agency in its investigations into the international nuclear black market, although it has not let the agency question Khan.
While the Pakistani spokesman dismissed the claim, he said its investigations into the unauthorized spread of nuclear technology were yet not closed.
Citing a tape it obtained of a closed-door speech to a private group, the paper quoted former CIA Director George J. Tenet describing A.Q.
Pakistan's official reaction came a day after Farid Soleimani, a former senior official for the National Council for Resistance in Iran, told reporters in Vienna that Tehran received the bomb diagram between 1994 and 1996 and a quantity of highly enriched uranium from Khan in 2001.
Investigators looking into illicit transfers of nuclear weapons technology have recently uncovered a South African-based scheme to deliver a complete uranium enrichment plant to Libya, The Los Angeles Times reported Sunday.
Citing documents and interviews, the newspaper said the discovery provided fresh evidence of the reach and sophistication of Pakistani scientist Abdul Qadeer Khan's global black market in nuclear know-how and equipment.
The dimensions of the plot began to emerge in September, when police raided a factory outside Johannesburg, according to the report.
They found the elements of a two-story steel processing system for the enrichment plant, packed in 11 freight containers for shipment to Libya.
South African officials have disclosed only that they discovered nuclear components, the paper said.
But The Times has learned that the massive system was designed to operate an array of 1,000 centrifuges for enriching uranium.
Once assembled in Libya, the plant could have produced enough weapons-grade uranium to manufacture several nuclear bombs a year, according to the report.
Delivery of the plant would have greatly accelerated Libya's efforts to develop nuclear weapons, The Times said.
The discovery of a South African connection to A.Q.
Khan network has led to the arrests of four business and engineering figures in South Africa, including some who had been involved in the former apartheid regime's nuclear program, the paper said.
Khan, the disgraced architect of Pakistan's nuclear program, took full responsibility in February for nuclear leaks to Iran, Libya and North Korea.
Libya has since renounced its nuclear program and allowed the United States to ship its key technological components out of the country.
South Africa, which was close to testing a nuclear device in the late 1970s, has abandoned its nuclear program following the collapse of the apartheid regime.
Pakistan on Monday denied reports in a US magazine that it was helping American special forces target suspected weapons sites for air strikes in neighbouring Iran.
"There is no such collaboration," foreign ministry spokesman Masood Khan said, referring to an article in the New Yorker magazine that claimed Pakistani scientists were providing the US with information on Iranian nuclear sites.
"We do not have much information about Iran's nuclear programme so I think this report is far-fetched and it exaggerates facts which do not exist in the first place," Khan told a weekly press briefing in Islamabad.
"I do not think there is any substance in what has been reported.
I think this is pure conjecture."
The New Yorker said Pakistan was helping the US in return for guarantees that it will not have to hand over disgraced nuclear scientist Abdul Qadeer Khan to international authorities for questioning.
Khan, the architect of Pakistan's nuclear programme, in February took responsibility for transfers of nuclear technology to Iran, Libya and North Korea.
He was pardoned by President Pervez Musharraf.
The magazine said Pakistani scientists were giving information to be used by US commandos searching for underground nuclear installations in eastern Iran.
The government expressed skepticism Thursday over a claim by an Iranian opposition group that Abdul Qadeer Khan, the disgraced father of Pakistan's nuclear program, had given Iran a blueprint for a nuclear bomb and some weapons-grade uranium.
"We do not attach importance to this report or claim," Foreign Ministry spokesman Masood Khan told a news conference in the capital, Islamabad.
"The validity of this claim is being questioned and it is being viewed with skepticism."
Khan's network in supplying Iran with designs for older Pakistani centrifuges used to enrich uranium, but that they also suspect it provided a warhead design.
Khan as "at least as dangerous as Osama bin Laden" because of his role in providing nuclear technology to other countries.
U.S. intelligence officials and the IAEA, working separately, are still untangling Khan's travels in the years before his arrest.
A tape recording of the speech was obtained by The New York Times.
The posting of the unclassified version on the agency's Web site on Tuesday comes two days before a meeting in Vienna, Austria, of the International Atomic Energy Agency, the United Nations' nuclear monitoring group, is scheduled to review the status of Iran's weapons program.
"The Report to Congress on the Acquisition of Technology Relating to Weapons of Mass Destruction and Advanced Conventional Munitions" is the first to be issued by the agency since last November.
Its focus is the six-month period from July to December 2003, but it also discusses broader trends.
The report says the agency remains convinced that Iran is pursuing a clandestine weapons program, despite claims to the contrary by the Tehran government.
It says Iran's stated willingness to allow inspections by the IAEA is likely to prevent Tehran from using its declared nuclear sites to produce weapons, but warns that it may use covert facilities for those purposes.
The CIA began to infiltrate Khan's network in the late 1990s, according to the account Tenet is now spelling out in his speeches.
That operation led to the unraveling of the network's ties to Libya and the unmasking last year of Libya's illicit weapons program.
When experts from the United States and the International Atomic Energy Agency came upon blueprints for a 10-kiloton atomic bomb in the files of the Libyan weapons program earlier this year, they found themselves caught between gravity and pettiness.
The discovery gave the experts a new appreciation of the audacity of the rogue nuclear network led by A.Q.
Khan, a chief architect of Pakistan's bomb.
Intelligence officials had watched Khan for years and suspected that he was trafficking in machinery for enriching uranium to make fuel for warheads.
But the detailed design represented a new level of danger, particularly since the Libyans said he had thrown it in as a deal-sweetener when he sold them $100 million in nuclear gear.
"This was the first time we had ever seen a loose copy of a bomb design that clearly worked," said one American expert, "and the question was: Who else had it?
The Iranians?
The Syrians?
Al-Qaida?"
But that threat was quickly overshadowed by smaller questions.
The experts from the United States and the IAEA, the U.N. nuclear watchdog -- in a reverberation of their differences over Iraq's unconventional weapons -- began quarreling over control of the blueprints.
The friction was palpable at Libya's Ministry of Scientific Research, said one participant, when the Americans accused international inspectors of having examined the design before they arrived.
After hours of tense negotiation, agreement was reached to keep it in a vault at the Energy Department in Washington, but under IAEA seal.
It was a sign of things to come.
Nearly a year after Khan's arrest, secrets of his nuclear black market continue to uncoil, revealing a vast global enterprise.
But the inquiry has been hampered by discord between the Bush administration and the nuclear watchdog, and by Washington's concern that if it pushes too hard for access to Khan, a national hero in Pakistan, it could destabilize an ally.
As a result, much of the urgency has been sapped from the investigation, helping keep hidden the full dimensions of the activities of Khan and his associates.
There is no shortage of tantalizing leads.
The report, issued to Congress, is an annual update, required by law, on countries' acquisition of illicit weapons technology.
In a recent closed-door speech to a private group, George J. Tenet, the former director of central intelligence, described Khan, the father of Pakistan's nuclear weapons program, as being "at least as dangerous as Osama bin Laden" because of his role in providing nuclear technology to other countries.
Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf on Sunday defended his decision not to allow international investigators to interrogate A.Q.
But it suggests that U.S. intelligence agencies now believe that the bomb-making designs provided by the network to Iran in the 1990s were more significant than the U.S. government had previously disclosed.
Khan, the rogue Pakistani scientist accused of peddling nuclear secrets around the world.
Appearing offended, Musharraf said the requests from U.N. nuclear inspectors indicated a lack of trust in Pakistan.
In a CNN interview, he portrayed the issue as a matter of national pride.
President Bush met with Musharraf on Saturday and urged the Pakistani general to make sure that all possible information about nuclear proliferation by the Khan network be turned over to the Americans.
Musharraf promised to do so.
But the White House did not ask for direct access to Khan -- apparently in deference to Pakistani sensitivities about a man who, as the father of the Pakistani atomic bomb, had been considered a hero.
However, the International Atomic Energy Agency still wants to interview Khan, who has been pardoned by Musharraf, as well as his assistant, who is being held in Malaysia.
Lacking such cooperation, officials deem it unlikely that Khan's activities will ever be fully unraveled, the Los Angeles Times reported Sunday.
In the CNN interview Sunday, Musharraf insisted that Pakistan could do the best job interrogating Khan.
``It shows a lack of trust in us,'' Musharraf complained.
``We can question him the best, and then there is ... a domestic sensitivity.
This man is a hero for the Pakistanis and there is a sensitivity that maybe the world wants to intervene in our nuclear program, which nobody wants.
...
''It is a pride of the nation,`` he concluded.
Analysts have raised doubts about whether Musharraf is keeping Khan from speaking to international investigators for fear the scientist might reveal the extent to which some of his activities may have been condoned by the Pakistani military.
Musharraf denied ''200 percent`` that any Pakistani government or the military had any knowledge that Khan was making nuclear weapons information available to other nations.
During a visit to the United States, the Pakistani leader, a key Bush administration ally in the war on terrorism, also said that in hindsight, the U.S. decision to invade Iraq was a mistake.
''We have landed ourselves in more trouble,`` he told CNN's ''Late Edition.``
Musharraf said he had no idea where Osama bin Laden was hiding but suggested that al-Qaida's command structure in Pakistan has been broken by recent military operations aimed at rousting terrorist forces from tribal areas along the border with Afghanistan.
In Pakistan, pro-government and opposition parties staged large street demonstrations to coincide with Musharraf's foreign tour.
In the central city of Multan, the main opposition Islamic alliance held a rally and vowed to force Musharraf to quit as army chief if he reneged on his promise to do so voluntarily by year's end, the Reuters news agency reported.
Loosening the military's control over politics has been a key goal of the Pakistani democracy movement, but the parliament recently passed a law that would allow Musharraf to continue to hold the top army job and the presidency.
A new report from the CIA says the arms trafficking network led by the Pakistani scientist A.Q.
Khan provided Iran's nuclear program with "significant assistance," including the designs for "advanced and efficient" weapons components.
The unclassified version of the report, posted Tuesday on the agency's Web site (www.cia.gov), does not say explicitly whether Khan's network sold Iran complete plans for building a warhead, as the network is known to have done for Libya and perhaps North Korea.
Given the urgency of the Libyan and Khan disclosures, many private and governmental experts expected that the Bush administration and the IAEA would work together.
But European diplomats said the administration never turned over valuable information to back up its wider suspicions about other countries.
"It doesn't like to share," a senior European diplomat involved in nuclear intelligence said of the United States.
U.S. and foreign intelligence agencies had long suspected Khan of running a vast nuclear proliferation enterprise and, according to Secretary of State Colin Powell, the Bush administration was "well aware of his activities" in 2001.
"Working with British colleagues, we pieced together his subsidiaries, his clients, his front companies, his finances and manufacturing plants," Tenet said, according to an audiotape of the speech obtained by the New York Times.
"We were inside his residence, inside his facilities, inside his rooms.
We were everywhere these people were."
Tenet said the Khan operation stretched across three continents and called the bust "one of the greatest success stories nobody ever talks about."
As U.S. and British intelligence worked to uncover the Khan network, the U.N.'s Vienna-based International Atomic Energy Agency proceeded on a parallel track.
By the spring of 2003, Iranian leaders had told IAEA officials about a black market where they had been buying nuclear material for the previous 18 years.
The Iranians claimed they were working through middlemen and were not aware of the identity of the suppliers, according to Mark Gwozdecky, the spokesman for IAEA.
Around the same time, the Americans and British reaped the benefits of the close surveillance of Khan's operations.
They were tracking the shipment of nuclear parts to Libya.
Italy intercepted once such shipment on a cargo ship in October 2003 that was carrying centrifuge parts.
Confronted with the evidence, and given Libya's desire to end longstanding economic sanctions, Tripoli confessed and renounced its nuclear program.
After Libya invited IAEA inspectors in December 2003, they uncovered a trove of incriminating evidence pointing to Khan.
"Libya helps fill in the blanks.
They were working directly with Khan and provided IAEA information about the actual supply chain," Gwozdecky said.
The IAEA believes Khan's network provided Libya with uranium hexafluoride, the raw material used in centrifuges to produce enriched uranium.
The network also provided the industrial help necessary for Libya to make its own uranium hexafluoride, as well as centrifuge and atomic bomb designs and machine shop equipment to service the centrifuges.
Much of this material has been dismantled in Libya and shipped to the United States where it is being studied at the Energy Department's Oak Ridge, Tenn., facilities.
Iran also received Khan's help on centrifuge technology, according to a CIA report to Congress.
And the CIA says Khan sold nuclear materials to North Korea.
At a minimum, Khan provided a turn-key nuclear bomb program to Libya, while greatly speeding up the nuclear program of Iran, a country that sponsors terrorist organizations.
"Iran wouldn't be talking about getting nuclear weapons if it hadn't been for Khan," said David Albright, a leading nuclear expert and president of the Institute for Science and International Security, a non-proliferation think-tank.
Khan's centrifuge designs are particularly important to covert nuclear programs because they allow the development of bomb-making material with greater secrecy, compared with the gaseous diffusion method of producing U-235.
"Centrifuge enrichment is much less energy-and-time consuming than gaseous diffusion, and you can hide it a lot easier," said Henry Sokolski, executive director of the Nonproliferation Policy Education Center in Washington, D.C.
U.S. intelligence and the U.N.'s Vienna-based International Atomic Energy Agency are trying to determine whether A. Q. Khan or Iran, Libya or North Korea shared nuclear know-how with third parties, like al-Qaida.
The terrorist group has been pursuing atomic weapons and has said that it would use nuclear bombs against the United States.
In a recent paid speech after he left his post as CIA director, George Tenet said the CIA's involvement in breaking up A. Q. Khan's proliferation operation dated to 1997.
"I am not a madman or a nut," he added.
Although they were subsequently released, the CIA now believes that one of the scientists "may have provided some assistance to al-Qaida's program" to acquire nuclear weaponry, the spy agency said in the recent report to Congress.
In a 2001 interview, Khan said the longstanding rumors about his work in nuclear proliferation were "unsubstantiated and fabricated lies" fomented by foreign governments "because I disturbed all their strategic plans, the balance of power and blackmailing potential in this part of the world" by building a nuclear arsenal for Pakistan.
Born in Bhopal, India in 1936, A. Q. Kahn and his family migrated to Pakistan in 1952 five years after the country was formed in a bloody partition with India.
Khan came from modest means -- his father was a teacher but stressed the value of education as a way to rise above the crippling poverty that pervades much of Pakistan.
Like many Pakistanis of his generation, Khan's worldview was shaped by Pakistan's opening conflict with India during the partition.
In a 2001 interview, Khan said that when he was a youth in the late 1940s, during the height of the partition conflict, he recalled train after train "full of dead Muslims" pulling into a local train station.
When Khan's family -- and thousands of other Muslims -- left India for Pakistan, Indian soldiers stripped them of their valuables, a loss of dignity that left a lasting impression on the youngster.
"I had been traveling with a pen that my brother gave me when I passed my exams, and just as I was crossing out of India, a border guard reached towards me and snatched it from my pocket," Khan said.
"The pen had almost no monetary value, but the guard's behavior hurt me, and it was something I'll never forget.
"Khan trained as an engineer at the University of Karachi, where he obtained his bachelors of science degree in 1960, and then obtained advanced metallurgical training in the then-West Germany, Belgium and Holland.
In the 1970s, Khan worked in Europe for Urenco, a consortium funded by the British, Dutch and German governments that manufactured high-speed centrifuges that produce enriched uranium U-235 by spinning uranium hexafluoride gas.
It's the U-235 that comprises uranium-fueled atomic bombs.
Khan later stole centrifuge designs and fled to Pakistan in 1976 where he ran the country's nuclear program for the next 25 years.
In 1983 a Dutch court convicted him in absentia for stealing nuclear secrets and sentenced him to four years in prison, but the conviction was later overturned on a technicality.
Those secrets greatly advanced Pakistan's nuclear program that culminated in the 1998 atomic test explosions.
Khan received his nation's highest civilian honors for his contributions.
The scientist is something of a Renaissance man.
Married to a South African, he has westernized tastes, is fluent in English and Dutch, an animal lover who takes in stray dogs, raises peacocks and enjoys feeding wild monkeys.
He has a special fondness for Urdhu poetry and beautiful houses (he has owned properties in Pakistan, Mali and Dubai) and expensive cars.
A father of two, he is a self-described " kindest person," who has funded charities and medical clinics for the poor in Pakistan.
Pakistanis who have met him describe Khan as passionate about public issues, always ready with an opinion on science, politics, religion and foreign affairs.
At times garrulous and gregarious, Khan is described as polite and witty.
"He is humble and not outwardly arrogant," said Hassan Abbas, a former Pakistani security official and author of " Pakistan's Drift into Extremism."
But in his infrequent interviews and public statements, Khan has revealed another side: He is a virulent Muslim nationalist with an Islamist's hatred of the United States, Israel and the West.
"All the western countries, including Israel, are not only Pakistan's enemies but also enemies of Islam," he charged in a 1984 interview.
He called the U.S. effort to prevent the flow of nuclear technology around the globe "part of the crusades which the Christians and Jews had initiated against the Muslims 1,000 years ago."
Like many Muslims, Khan has spoken of a worldwide "Zionist" conspiracy to rob Muslim nations of their power and glory.
Shortly after the Sept. 11 attacks, Pakistan detained two of its nuclear scientists on suspicion that they shared nuclear information with Osama bin Laden, the al-Qaida chief.
Based on documents recovered in Afghanistan, the agency described al-Qaida's atomic efforts "rudimentary nuclear research, although the extent of its indigenous program is unclear."
The State Department's Bureau of Non-Proliferation, the lead U.S. agency for preventing the global spread of weapons of mass destruction, has declined to discuss the Khan case.
Secretary of State Powell said that when he asked Musharraf if he had known about Khan's work, the general denied any knowledge.
"That's what he has said to me, and I have no evidence to prove or disprove his statement."
All of which leads to the question of motive, another major thrust in the IAEA investigation.
While Khan profited financially from the sale of nuclear secrets, money likely was not the sole motivation.
The IAEA's ElBaradei has said that "ideology" also played a factor.
For example, Hassan Abbas, the former Pakistani security official, said Khan may have been motivated by the strategic view held by some Pakistani military leaders that spreading nuclear technology was a way to counter U.S. power and what Islamabad fears is an emerging alliance among India, the United States and Israel.
While Khan is not a religious extremist like bin Laden, he may also have been motivated by a pan-Muslim view of spreading weapons to guarantee the influence of Muslim countries.
"Khan was motivated by some element of ideology, greed and convoluted strategic thinking," said Haqqani, the former Pakistani diplomat.
Another likely motivation is Khan's ample ego, said Oakley.
"It may be a little of, 'Look at me.
I am a great man,"' Oakley said.
Meanwhile, Khan passes time in his Islamabad estate, forbidden from public speaking.
The Pakistani government has not said how long his limbo will last, nor has it publicly explained the rules of what Khan is allowed to do while under house arrest.
But house arrest has a unique history in Pakistani politics, namely to take controversial individuals out of circulation, a penalty without substance, until the controversy blows over.
"As far as Pakistani law is concerned, Khan has not been convicted of any crime.
He has already been forgiven and pardoned," said Abbas.
"The house arrest isn't meant as a punishment but more as a sop to the Americans."
In Pakistan, Khan is often cast as a victim of Western pressure on the Musharraf government.
In a recent editorial, the Islamabad-based Pakistan Newswire summed up Musharraf's predicament in the Khan case.
"Why is a person still acknowledged by no less a person than the president of Pakistan as a national hero being subjected to such humiliating treatment?"
the editorial asked.
"Surely, the fact that the man had to apologize to the entire nation was punishment enough."
E-mail: eric@hearst.com
Pakistani government said on Monday that Abdullah Q. Khan, the founder of the nation's nuclear program, will not be interrogated by concerned agencies from the United States.
The Foreign Office spokesman Masood Khan told a weekly press conference here that the Pakistani authorities have the ability to handle the nuclear proliferation control.
Earlier this month media reported that certain US officials suggested that "the Nuke father," who was involved in an illegal transfer of nuclear know-how to Iran, should be interrogated by the US authority.
Khan's nuclear network "was so compartmented within government circles" and Musharraf was "outside the circle," Powell said of Musharraf's explanation.
The Bush administration, always working to build-up Musharraf, has accepted his claims of innocence.
Investigators are also trying to determine the extent of the Khan network and all of the companies around the globe that may have played a part.
"But he wouldn't necessarily understand bomb designs nor would he understand uranium conversion and the many other technologies involved."
There are at least 30 companies in 30 countries "all over the globe involved in this fantastic, sophisticated, illicit trafficking network with Mr. A.Q.
Khan acting as CEO," according to Dr. Mohamed ElBaradei, chief of the IAEA.
Major elements of Khan's network have been uncovered in Malaysia and South Africa.
Malaysian police arrested a Sri Lankan businessman -- Bukhary Syed Abu Tahir -- who admitted shipping nuclear components to Iran and Libya at Khan's behest.
Tahir also admitted receiving two briefcases containing $3 million in cash from Iran in exchange for providing nuclear weapons material.
In South Africa, authorities are investigating the sale of nuclear weapons technology to Libya through middlemen tied to Khan.
Three individuals allegedly tied to the Khan network, including European nationals, were arrested as part of the South African investigation.
Khan, the one person who could provide answers to the many pending questions, is out of reach of the IAEA and U.S. intelligence agencies.
Pakistan has refused to allow intelligence officers to talk to Khan, while offering to relay written questions to him.
The problem with that arrangement is that investigators can't be sure whether it's Khan -- or someone else -- answering the questions.
Nonetheless, a Vienna-based diplomat says the Pakistanis have been cooperative with U.S. and IAEA officials about disclosing what their investigators have uncovered concerning Khan's operations.
Cooperation between Pakistani government and the U.S. and IAEA "has moved slowly but positively," he said.
The IAEA wants to meet with Tahir, the Sri Lankan businessman currently in a Malaysian jail, to help officials frame better questions to Khan, the diplomat said.
In addition, the IAEA has requested permission from Islamabad to send its investigators to examine Pakistan's uranium centrifuges.
By comparing the Pakistan models with those in Iran, the IAEA can conclusively determine whether Iran's centrifuges originated in Pakistan.
Given that the Pakistan military, headed by Gen. Pervez Musharraf, is all-powerful there and that A. Q. Khan was such a high-profile figure, some experts scoff at Musharraf's insistence that he didn't know about Khan's nuclear black marketeering.
Husain Haqqani, the former Pakistani ambassador to Sri Lanka, said in an interview that "one would have to stretch the bounds of credulity to believe that the government wasn't involved."
"It's hard to believe that Pakistan's top scientist could travel to places like North Korea without the government's knowledge," he said.
Robert Oakley, former U.S. ambassador to Pakistan, gives Musharraf and other senior leaders the benefit of the doubt, speculating that the general may have been shielded from full knowledge of Khan's proliferation activities.
"Did Pakistan's military know something was going on?
I'd say yes, Did they know everything?
Probably not," he said.
Oakley added that Khan's illicit export network wasn't a new creation but rather reversed the flow of information and material on the import network that Khan and the Pakistan military had used to acquire nuclear materials for their country's atomic program.
The assumption among some informed diplomats and intelligence officials is that, at a minimum, Khan must have had help from other senior scientists in the Pakistani government.
"Khan is a metallurgist, so he understood well about building centrifuges," a Vienna-based diplomat said.
"They just feel it's too sensitive and that there is nothing new they feel they can say," said Jim Kelman, a State Department spokesman.
said Mark Gwozdecky, the IAEA spokeman.
"That makes life more difficult.
But the meetings were not secret, or illegal.
But European intelligence officials said IAEA inspectors who recently went there found no signs of clandestine nuclear arms and some evidence of shoddy workmanship that bespeaks low atomic expectations.As for Syria, the Bush administration had repeatedly charged that it has secretly tried to acquire nuclear arms.
But the IAEA has so far found no signs of a relationship with Khan or a clandestine nuclear weapons program.
Worried about what is still unknown, the IAEA is quietly setting up what it calls the Covert Nuclear Trade Analysis Unit, agency officials disclosed.
It has about a half-dozen specialists who are scanning international files and records and databases for evidence of secret nuclear deals by the Khan network or its imitators.
"I would not be surprised to discover that some countries pocketed some centrifuges," ElBaradei said.
"They may have considered it a chance of a lifetime to get some equipment and thought, 'Well, maybe it will be good for a rainy day."'
Public enemy No.
1 for most Americans is Osama bin Laden, the mastermind of the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks who continues to threaten more deadly strikes against the United States.
In close competition for that dubious title should be Abdul Qadeer Khan, 68, also known as A.Q.
Khan, the Pakistani nuclear scientist who oversaw the spread of nuclear weapons to U.S. adversaries, possibly including al-Qaida, bin Laden's terrorist group.
Khan arguably has done more to undermine U.S. security than bin Laden.
He has confessed to transferring nuclear weapons know-how to Iran, Libya and North Korea.
U.S. officials and investigators at the U.N.'s International Atomic Energy Agency are still searching for other possible customers who possess Khan's digitized blueprints for nuclear-specific manufacturing equipment and how-to manuals for running uranium enrichment centrifuges, much of it on handy compact disks.
Since the invention of nuclear weapons 60 years ago, no one has done more to spread those weapons to more countries than Khan.
The Khan network of suppliers, middlemen and front companies flourished across 30 countries.
He was a for-profit nuclear proliferator, with a one-stop atomic emporium that allowed shoppers to buy bomb designs, centrifuges for enriching uranium from uranium hexafluoride, and consulting services to help get weapons plants up and running.
-- "At least as dangerous as Osama bin Laden" -- former CIA Director George Tenet.
-- "A very serious proliferatorvery dangerous to the world" -- Secretary of State Colin Powell.
-- Khan's nuclear smuggling network is "mind-boggling" and "beyond anyone's imagination" -- Dr. Mohamed ElBaradei, chief of the International Atomic Energy Agency.
-- "A monstrous creature" -- Rep. Tom Lantos, D-Calif., top Democrat on the House Foreign Relations Committee.
-- Khan "has poured kerosene on the nuclear proliferation embers."
-- Henry Sokolski, executive director of the Nonproliferation Policy Education Center in Washington, D.C.
-- "He did huge damage" to U.S. security -- Graham Allison, former assistant secretary of defense and author of "Nuclear Terrorism: The Ultimate Preventable Catastrophe."
-- Khan is "an evil genius, a Dr. Strangelove" -- Robert Oakley, former U.S. ambassador to Pakistan.
Despite his notoriety, A. Q. Khan has escaped the "most-wanted" label applied to bin Laden because of a delicate diplomatic and political minuet linking Khan, Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf and President Bush.
There is also worry in both Washington and Vienna about Egypt, which has two research reactors near Cairo and a long history of internal debate about whether to pursue nuclear arms.
Experts also disclosed that Saudi scientists traveled to Pakistan for some of Khan's scientific conferences.
In contrast to the missing bin Laden -- target of a global manhunt -- Khan's whereabouts are well known.
But the company also engaged in legitimate computer sales, giving it plausible cover.
So we're on the learning curve."
Federal officials said they were reluctant to give the IAEA classified information because the agency is too prone to leaks.
The agency has 137 member states, and U.S. officials believe some of them may be using the agency to hunt for nuclear secrets.
One senior administration official put it this way: "The cops and the crooks all serve on the agency's board together."
The result is that two separate, disjointed searches are on for other nuclear rogue states -- one by Washington, the other by the IAEA.
And there is scant communication between the feuding bureaucracies.
That lack of communication with the U.N. agency extends to the Nuclear Suppliers Group, a loose organization of countries that produce nuclear equipment.
It can stop the export of restricted atomic technology to a suspect customer, but it does not report its actions to the IAEA.
Moreover, there is no communication between the IAEA and the Bush administration's Proliferation Security Initiative, which seeks to intercept illicit nuclear trade at sea or in the air.
"It's a legitimate question whether we need a very different kind of super-agency that can deal with the new world of A.Q.
Khans," said a senior administration official.
"Because we sure don't have the system we need now."
THE HUNT GOES ON
ElBaradei, the head of the U.N. agency, says he is plunging ahead, pursuing his own investigation even as the Bush administration attempts to have him replaced when his term expires late next year.
In an interview in Vienna, he defended his record, citing the information he has wrung out of Iran, and his agency's discovery of tendrils of Khan's network in more than 30 countries around the globe.
"We're getting an idea of how it works," he said of the Khan network.
"And we're still looking" for other suppliers and customers.
One method is to investigate the countries Khan visited before his arrest.
Nuclear experts disclosed that the countries were Afghanistan, Egypt, Iran, Ivory Coast, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, Niger, Nigeria, North Korea, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sudan, Syria, Tunisia and the United Arab Emirates.
Many of them are Islamic, and several of the African countries are rich in uranium ore.
In one of its biggest operations, the agency is hunting for nuclear clues in a half-dozen of the network's buildings and warehouses in Dubai, which for years were used as the central location for assembling and repacking centrifuges.
Both in Washington and in Vienna, the most delicate investigations involve important American allies -- including Egypt and Saudi Arabia.
So far, said European intelligence officials familiar with the agency's inner workings, no hard evidence of clandestine nuclear arms programs has surfaced.
Suspicious signs have emerged, however.
For instance, experts disclosed that SMB Computers, Tahir's front company in Dubai for the Khan network, made telephone calls to Saudi Arabia.
Each man for his own reasons has thrown a cloak of silence over what is emerging as the biggest nuclear scandal in history.
He is living under house arrest in a tony section of Islamabad, the capital of Pakistan, as part of a deal that Musharraf unveiled last year.
Begging the question, where is it?"
Husain Haqqani, a former Pakistani ambassador to Sri Lanka and adviser to prime ministers Nawaz Sharif and Benazir Bhutto, says Khan is so popular in Pakistan that if he announced he wanted his countrymen to give him money, "150 million Pakistanis would give it to him.
Haqqani teaches international relations at Boston University and is author of the forthcoming book, "Pakistan between Mosque and Military."
Musharraf presides over a nation festering with Islamic militants, with large segments of the population sympathetic to al-Qaida and remnants of the fundamentalist Taliban regime in Afghanistan, which the U.S. military toppled three years ago.
The general is in no position to get tough with Khan by, for example, putting him on trial, especially since such a step would appear to be catering to the United States, which is widely unpopular throughout the country.
Pakistan's religious parties already are angry with Musharraf for placing Khan along with at least a half-dozen of his associates under house arrest.
Musharraf won't let U.S. investigators or officials from the U.N.'s International Atomic Energy Agency question Khan directly ("It's a matter of national pride" he says) to find out more about his far-flung proliferation network.
From the Pakistani dictator's point of view, the least said about Khan, the better.
The Pakistani leader, who has narrowly escaped two assassination attempts, keeps one eye nervously focused at all times on how Islamic militants in his nation react to his policies, especially when they involve coordination with the United States.
And there is a huge amount of coordination.
Powell said he speaks with Musharraf more than with any other foreign leader.
"We talk all the time," Powell said of the estimated 90 conversations he said they have had.
The Bush administration is also tiptoeing around the Khan case.
Because Musharraf is a key ally in the U.S. war against terrorism -- after the Sept. 11 strikes he agreed to withdraw support for the Taliban, a regime that had supported al-Qaida -- the Bush administration doesn't want to add to Musharraf's precarious domestic circumstances by pushing too hard to gain access to Khan.
Another reason the Bush administration is eager to let the Khan case gently disappear is that it represents a failure of American intelligence and diplomacy that one man -- the leading nuclear scientist of a U.S. ally -- could do so much damage for so long and escape detection.
The U.S. silent treatment for Khan also spares the administration from embarrassing comparisons with another intelligence failure -- the flawed prediction that Iraq had weapons of mass destruction, the administration's stated reason for invading that country.
In the one case, U.S. intelligence flunked with its "slam dunk" certainty that Iraq had weapons of mass destruction.
In the other case, U.S. intelligence failed to detect the massive nuclear proliferation program based in Pakistan, an American ally.
Khan did much, much more to foster the spread of nuclear weapons than Saddam Hussein ever did.
In their eagerness to downplay the Khan case, American officials have tried to make it sound like ancient history.
For example, during last fall's election campaign, President Bush declared that Khan's nuclear network "has been brought to justice."
Similarly, Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld asserted that Khan's operations have been "rolled upThe network is gone."
Condoleezza Rice, Bush's former national security adviser and secretary of state-designate, called Khan's house arrest a sufficient penalty that matched the crime.
"A.Q.
Khan, in a sense, has been brought to justice because he is out of the business that he loved most," she said.But the IAEA is not as cheery.
"While we believe we have identified the major players and suppliers, we have not yet satisfied ourselves that we have got all of the subcontractors.
Nor have we accounted for all the material that was produced for the network.
Pakistani kids would empty their pockets for him."
Pakistan exploded a series of atomic bombs in 1998, bringing that country into nuclear parity with archrival India, with whom it has fought three wars.
That deal gave Khan a full pardon and allowed him to keep the millions of dollars he is believed to have netted from the illicit sales.
Khan is a hero in Pakistan and throughout the Islamic world for perfecting his country's first nuclear weapon -- and, by definition, the much-anticipated first "Muslim bomb."
In exchange, Khan took responsibility for the crimes and agreed to the house arrest -- a punishment that forced Khan, a high profile and beloved figure in Pakistan, to vanish from public life and scientific endeavor.
A U.S. alert to Musharraf apparently triggered Khan's confession.
According to Secretary of State Colin Powell, the United States by early 2004 had amassed so much evidence that Khan was peddling nuclear secrets that Powell telephoned Musharraf and told him to "deal with" Khan.
"I said to him, "We know so much about this that we're going to go public with it, and within a few weeks, okay?
And you need to deal with this before you have to deal with it publicly."'
The next step came on Feb. 4 when, in a dramatic televised speech, Khan confessed and -- without naming the countries that had received his services -- accepted "full responsibility" for exporting nuclear technology.
"My dear brothers and sisters, I have chosen to appear before you to offer my deepest regrets and unqualified apologies," he said, speaking in English.
The nuclear proliferation, he said, was "initiated at my behest."
"I was confronted with the evidence and the findings, and I have voluntarily admitted that much of it is true and accurate," he said.
He was quick to absolve the Musharraf government of any involvement.
While some of his colleagues at the A.Q.
Khan Research Laboratories -- Pakistan's top nuclear facility -- are also under investigation for trafficking, "There was never any kind of authorization for these activities by the government," he said.
The next day, it was Musharraf's turn to appear before the TV cameras.
Dressed in an Army jacket, khaki trousers and combat boots, the Pakistani leader announced at a news conference that he had pardoned Khan for spreading the potential for nuclear terror.
The Pakistani president signed off by telling how much he admired the scientist.
"All the proliferation, unfortunately, was under the supervision or orders of Dr. A.Q.
Khan," Musharraf told a news conference, quickly adding that Khan is "still my hero" for developing atomic weapons for Pakistan.
"Dr. A.Q.
Khan has made Pakistan a nuclear power," said Musharraf.
"I want to protect his honor."
Musharraf insisted that the Pakistani government had no knowledge of Khan's extensive proliferation network because the scientist had amassed enormous autonomy during the previous two decades as he developed nuclear weapons for Pakistan.
The general accused the governments of Libya and Iran of ratting on Khan to the IAEA.
"Muslim brothers did not ask us before giving our names," Musharraf complained.
Khan has been under house arrest since.
Musharraf's eagerness to whisk the matter out of sight reflects a harsh political fact of life for the 61-year-old general.
Abdul Qadeer Khan, the father of the Pakistani atomic bomb, delivered weapons grade highly enriched uranium to Iran in 2001, and Iran aims at getting a nuclear bomb next year, an Iranian opposition group said in Vienna Wednesday.