Seventy-three people are currently on death row in 12 states -- one-third of them in Texas -- for crimes committed before the age of 18.
Although there have been few executions for juvenile crimes in recent years, the United States is one of only a handful of nations where such executions are still legal, and the case has attracted worldwide attention.
It is nearly certain that the court's two swing voters, Justices O'Connor and Anthony M. Kennedy, will determine the outcome.
Four members of the court -- John Paul Stevens, David H. Souter, Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Stephen G. Breyer -- have already declared in a published opinion that they believe the death penalty for juveniles should be abolished.
Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist and Justices Antonin Scalia and Clarence Thomas opposed the 2002 mental retardation ruling, which opponents of capital punishment for juveniles are relying on to make their case.
(Optional Add End)
If the court throws out the sentencing guidelines, the issue will return to Congress.
Early congressional reactions to Blakely suggest that the ultimate result of scrapping the guidelines would be harsher penalties prescribed by politicians reluctant to be seen as soft on crime.
''(I)t may take only a couple of lenient sentences in high-profile cases to raise enough of a stir to increase mandatory minimum penalties,'' Sen. Orrin G. Hatch (R-Utah) said at a July 13 hearing of the Senate Judiciary Committee.
The Supreme Court justices, a solemn and sober lot, will spend time this fall talking about wine, beef, marijuana and dogs, all part of their wide-ranging duty to police the limits of the government's power.
They will also consider whether young murderers can be put to death for their crimes.
But when the court's term officially opens Monday, the first order of business will be to answer a question raised at the end of the last term: Is the federal sentencing system, which punishes 64,000 criminals a year, unconstitutional because it allows judges, acting alone, to add to prison terms?
If so, the Supreme Court may force a profound shift in how criminals are sentenced in America, one that will affect the state courts in many states as well as the federal system.
Until now, the general understanding has been that prosecutors charge defendants with a crime, juries typically decide whether they are guilty and, if so, judges impose the punishment.
In recent rulings, however, a narrow Supreme Court majority has said the right to a jury trial also includes the right to have a jury decide the key facts that determine a sentence.
Other than a prior conviction, ``any fact that increases the penalty for a crime'' must be decided by the jury or admitted by the defendant, Justice Antonin Scalia said for a 5-4 majority in the case of Blakeley vs. Washington.
That simple statement struck down the sentencing system in Washington state, and it now threatens to do the same in the federal system.
In both, judges are authorized to decide the ``aggravating factors'' that increase a prison term.
Take, for example, the case of Ducan Fanfan, who last year sold a small bag of cocaine to an informer outside a Burger King restaurant near Portland, Maine.
A jury found him guilty as charged of selling at least 500 grams of cocaine, a crime that called for six years in prison under U.S. sentencing guidelines.
On June 28, four days after the Blakely ruling, Fanfan came before a federal judge for sentencing.
Prosecutors said the defendant was the leader of a drug gang who had 2.5 kilograms of cocaine in his home and car.
Based on these facts -- which the judge found to be true -- Fanfan should go to prison for 16 years.
However, the court may decide that a ``national consensus'' has now formed against imposing the ultimate penalty against minors -- just as it did in 2002 with respect to the death penalty for moderately mentally retarded offenders.
The court has barred capital punishment for those younger than 16, but it ruled in 1989 that capital punishment for 16- and 17-year-old defendants does not constitute ``cruel and unusual punishment.''
03-633, a challenge to the constitutionality of the death penalty for persons who commit crimes while younger than 18.
About 20 states allowed executions of retarded people when the court voted 6-3 to outlaw them.
he asked.
"I don't see where there's a logical line."
The case has drawn intense interest.
People carrying sleeping bags arrived at the Supreme Court before midnight in hopes of getting a seat for the argument.
It featured a lively debate that touched on gang violence, global influence on America and scientific evidence about the development of the teenage brain.
The Supreme Court increasingly has looked at international opinion.
The four most liberal members _ Ginsburg, Breyer, and Justices John Paul Stevens and David H. Souter _ have taken a stand against the death penalty for minors, saying it is "a relic of the past and is inconsistent with evolving standards of decency in a civilized society."
Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, also an important swing vote, spoke only once during the arguments.
She pointed out that the statistics about the use of executions for juveniles showed the same consensus as existed two years ago against executing the mentally retarded.
Kennedy and O'Connor supported the 2002 decision.
On Oct. 13, the court will hear arguments in Roper vs. Simmons, No.
A possible revolution in the federal criminal justice system will be on the agenda when the Supreme Court opens its new term Monday.
In a rare two-hour afternoon oral argument session, the justices will consider whether the federal sentencing guidelines -- a manual of 400-plus pages meant to ensure that federal courts give defendants across the country approximately equal punishments for similar crimes -- can be reconciled with the Constitution.
The court is hearing the case on an expedited schedule in response to the uproar and confusion created by a 5 to 4 ruling it issued June 24, just before leaving for summer recess.
In that case, Blakely vs. Washington, the court struck down Washington state's sentencing guidelines, which, like the federal guidelines, permit judges to boost sentences based on their own post-conviction fact-finding, rather than relying only on facts admitted by the defendant or found by a jury.
That, the court ruled, violates the right to a jury trial guaranteed by the Sixth Amendment.
Though the court said in Blakely that it did not address the federal guidelines, the similarities between Washington's system and the federal system were such that defense lawyers across the country immediately began bombarding courts with Blakely challenges to their clients' sentences.
Lower courts have issued differing rulings in response, and some federal prosecutors have felt obliged to redraft indictments to make sure they conform to Blakely.
``It looks like a Number 10 earthquake to me,'' Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, who dissented in Blakely, told a conference of federal judges in July.
Although determining the precise magnitude of the Blakely aftershocks is the court's first major item of business, Blakely is by no means the only case of potential national significance on the court's docket.
However, imposing such a stiff sentence would be unconstitutional under the just-announced Blakely ruling, the judge concluded.
So he sent Fanfan to prison for six years based on just the jury's verdict.
Bush administration lawyers appealed Fanfan's case directly to the Supreme Court.
Prison officials say they seek to prevent gang violence while new inmates are evaluated.
However, Ashcroft, the U.S. attorney general, says federal drug laws forbid all use of marijuana.
Federal agents raided the homes of several Californian patients who grew their own.
In the last decade, Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist, the conservative leader, has insisted on limiting federal power.
For example, he spoke for a 5-4 majority that struck down the federal Gun-Free Schools Zone Act on the grounds that mere gun possession did not involve interstate commerce.
The liberal dissenters said the court should uphold the broad power of Congress.
Last year, the liberal 9th U.S.
Circuit Court of Appeals turned the tables.
Relying on the logic of Rehnquist's opinion, it ruled the use of homegrown marijuana was beyond the federal authority because it did not involve interstate commerce.
The court also will hear a challenge to a unique California prison policy that segregates new inmates by race for as many as 60 days.
Lawyers for Garrison Johnson, a black inmate, say racial segregation is unconstitutional in all instances.The court also will decide whether police can use drug-sniffing dogs in routine traffic stops.
Raich, who suffers from a brain tumor, uses homegrown marijuana to relieve her pain.
Usually, officers need some evidence of a drug crime before they search for narcotics.
But prosecutors contend that when a trained dog sniffs the air, it is not engaged in a search, and therefore police may use dogs whenever and however they choose.
The agriculture industry will be closely watching a case about government-sponsored ad campaigns.
Cattlemen are challenging the fees they must pay for ads such as ``Beef, It's What for Dinner.''
Dozens of similar ad campaigns are sponsored by the U.S. Department of Agriculture as well as many states.
A ruling in the case of Veneman vs. Livestock Marketing Association could free farmers from having to pay for them.
A plea to declare capital punishment for juvenile offenders unconstitutional received a skeptical hearing at the Supreme Court Wednesday, as one of two justices likely to be pivotal to the outcome voiced repeated doubts.
Justice Anthony Kennedy observed that he was ``troubled'' that a ban might lead gang leaders to use 16- or 17-year-olds as ``hit men.''
``I'm very concerned about that,'' Kennedy told Seth Waxman, a former solicitor general of the United States who was arguing on behalf of Missouri death row inmate Christopher Simmons, who faces execution for a murder he committed at 17.
This is legal under the Compassionate Use Act approved by California's voters.
The case of John Ashcroft vs. Angel Raich may determine the fate of the medical marijuana laws in nine states.
They argued that it made a ``mockery'' of the law by permitting judges to give more lenient sentences based on certain facts but forbidding them from increasing the sentences based on other facts.
The answer depends on state laws.
Fanfan's is one of two cases that will be heard Monday afternoon as the justices debate what to do with the federal sentencing system.
The outcome is likely to affect most state courts.
The future of the death penalty for young murderers also is in doubt.
Four liberal justices -- John Paul Stevens, David H. Souter, Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Stephen G. Breyer -- have already said they view such as executions as ``shameful'' and a ``relic of the past.''
If they are joined by Justices Sandra Day O'Connor or Anthony M. Kennedy, the court would limit capital punishment to those who are age 18 or older at the time of their crime.
Since 1990, only Texas, Oklahoma and Virginia have carried out executions of young murderers.
The justices will take up a Missouri case, Roper vs. Simmons, on Oct. 13 to decide the issue.
The wine and marijuana cases will come before the court in December.
As wine has grown in popularity, many wine drinkers have asked whether they can order their favorite vintage from a distant vineyard and have it shipped directly to them.
About half the states forbid all direct shipments of wine across their borders.
``This case will determine whether consumers or a cartel of billion-dollar distributors will determine what wine is available to consumers in New York or two dozen other states,'' said Clint Bolick of the Washington-based Institute for Justice, who represents Lucas.
Only licensed wholesalers are permitted to import alcohol, and they in turn sell it to retailers.
The states rely on the 21st Amendment, which repealed the prohibition on alcohol sales and was approved in 1933, for this authority.
The amendment states that ``importation into any state .
.
.
of intoxicating liquors is hereby prohibited.''
Although all states permit the sale of alcohol, they do so only through their own sets of regulations.
Eleanor Heald, a wine critic from Troy, Mich., and David Lucas, the owner of a small winery near Lodi, Calif., are challenging the bans on wine shipments to Michigan and New York.
In the case of Granholm vs. Heald, they argue that the Constitution calls for a free flow of commerce across state lines, including that of alcohol.
Why not say they're immune from any criminal penalty?"
"Why pick on the death penalty?
Justice Antonin Scalia, a death penalty supporter, said the court could be asked to declare juveniles too immature to face punishment of any kind.
"I will be there.
In the last 10 years, only three states -- Oklahoma, Texas and Virginia -- have executed persons who were under 18.
Only two teenagers were condemned to death in 2003, compared with 15 in 1999.
Kennedy said he was concerned that eliminating the death penalty for young criminals would remove a "deterrent", notably among gang members.
But Simmons' attorney, Seth Waxman, replied that the death penalty was a useless deterrent against minors since "they weigh risks differently" to adults.
Eleven years later, the chilling imagery of her sister's murder still makes Pertie Mitchell shiver.
During a burglary, two teens stretched duct tape across Shirley Crook's mouth and eyes, then muscled her into her van.
An hour later, the hogtied woman was dumped off into the murky Meramec River.
"Bubble, bubble," witnesses later said they heard Christopher Simmons snicker as the woman's body sank.
"It makes your hands sweat, your stomach sick," Mitchell said, hoping for the day that Simmons is put to death.
I will watch him die."
O'Connor compared society's evolution toward opposing the juvenile death penalty to its position on executing the mentally ill.
The execution is not certain, though.
Using the Simmons case, the U.S. Supreme Court will hear arguments Wednesday on whether it is constitutional to execute killers who were juveniles when the crimes were committed.
The court agreed to hear the case after the Missouri Supreme Court last year struck down executions of juveniles and re-sentenced Simmons, now 28, to life in prison, deciding that such executions violate "evolving standards of decency."
Nineteen states allow executions of killers who were 16 or 17 at the time of the crime.
Since the 1976 reinstatement of the death penalty, 22 people _ 13 of them in Texas _ have been executed for crimes committed as 16- or 17-year-olds.
The U.S. Supreme Court in 1988 barred the death penalty for those 15 and younger.
Simmons and his attorneys did not reply to interview requests.
His advocates have said that executing people who kill as juveniles would be just as wrong as putting to death the mentally challenged, a practice outlawed by the Supreme Court in 2002.
People less than 18 years old, they argue, don't have fully developed brains and are incapable of making rational decisions.
"There was an inexorable trend concerning mental retardation, not here," Layton said, adding that if the number of executions of minors has decreased in the last few years it could rise in the future.
she asked.
"You know how many people get married or join the service when they're 17 or 18 years old?"
The three most conservative members of the court seemed to lean toward allowing the practice to continue.
The outcome appeared in the balance with the nine member court divided and the result likely to be decided by the two moderate justices.
The Supreme Court has been asked to rule on the fate of Christopher Simmons, who was condemned to death for the 1993 murder in Missouri of a woman who was abducted, tied up and thrown to her death from a bridge.
He was 17 at the time.
The Missouri Supreme Court commuted Simmons' sentence to life in prison in 2003, and the state has appealed that decision.
The US Supreme Court abolished the death sentence for those aged under 16 in 1988.
But the United States remains one of five countries that allow the execution of those aged 16-18 and there has been growing domestic and international pressure to halt that as well.
Only a few states still order executions for juveniles.
They include Texas and Alabama.
The Simmons case would decide the fate of 73 people currently on death row across the United States for crimes committed when they were minors.
Opinions given for previous cases indicate that the court's four more progressive justices favor abolishing juvenile execution.
"Why would someone be death eligible but not eligible to be an adult member of the community?"
Justice Anthony Kennedy, who along with Sandra Day O'Connor are considered the moderates, asked whether world opinion should be taken into account.
"No," answered James Layton, representing Missouri state which wants Simmons executed.
"Isn't it relevant?"
Justice Stephen Breyer asked, adding that he was not implying that it was up to the world to impose law on the United States.
Kennedy said, "What we do here should influence the rest of the world."
O'Connor, who joined Kennedy in passing a 2002 decision barring the execution of mentally ill people, appeared to agree.
Quoting President Thomas Jefferson, one of the framers of the US Constitution, she said, "To lead the world you must show a decent respect of mankind."
The Missouri attorney argued that "there are 17-year-olds that are equally culpable as 18-year-olds."
But Justice Ruth Ginsburg interrupted him to highlight that in the United States people under 18 years old cannot "buy tobacco, vote, sit on a jury."
Mitchell believes Simmons, who was then 17, was old enough to know right from wrong.
said Mitchell, 66.
Simmons was sentenced to die, but Missouri's highest court overturned the sentence last year.
"We are literally alone in the world," said Seth Waxman, Simmons' lawyer.
"You'd think I'd cried enough, but it never ends."
The Supreme Court on Wednesday struggled to assess the morality and propriety of states' executing murderers who killed at age 16 or 17 _ the ultimate punishment carried out in few places outside the United States.
The court has outlawed executions for those 15 and under when they committed their crimes.
Still, 19 of 50 states allow the death penalty for those older teenage killers.
Justices debated whether such killers are children who cannot grasp the consequences of their actions and should be kept from death row, or criminals whose executions would ensure justice for victims and deter other youths.
The justices seemed sharply aware of the world audience as they discussed whether the executions are cruel and unusual punishment in violation of the Constitution.
They heard arguments in a Missouri case involving Christopher Simmons, who at 17 kidnapped a neighbor and threw her off a bridge.
Juvenile offenders have been put to death in recent years in just a few other countries, including Iran, Pakistan, China and Saudi Arabia.
All those countries have gone on record as opposing capital punishment for minors.
Justices repeatedly referred to arguments filed on behalf of Simmons by foreign leaders, Nobel Peace Prize winners and former U.S. diplomats.
"Can you imagine what Shirley must have been feeling, fighting for a breath of air and what her mind must have been saying to her?
Justice Anthony M. Kennedy, a moderate expected to be a key swing vote, said that with world opinion against the punishment, "Does that have a bearing on what's unusual?"
James Layton, representing the state of Missouri, said the court's judgment about unconstitutional punishment in America "should not be based on what happens in the rest of the world."
"Is there some special reason why what happens abroad would not be relevant here?"
Justice Stephen Breyer asked.
Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, quoting from the U.S.
Declaration of Independence, said that for the United States to lead, it must "show a decent respect for the opinions of mankind."
Simmons was convicted of the 1993 murder of Shirley Crook.
Prosecutors say he planned the burglary and killing.
The victim, wearing only underwear and cowboy boots, was hog-tied and thrown off a bridge.
I think of that all the time," she said.
These days, Mitchell talks of little successes, like paring to just one the number of antidepressants she still takes to deal with the crime that "never leaves you."
"This man has nothing to justify what he did."
Authorities said Simmons privately boasted of killing Crook because she had seen his face.
Simmons' advocates argue that he led a tough life, from the time his parents separated.
Abuse by a relative, they said, included tying him as a toddler to a tree for hours to keep him from wandering while the man fished _ or taking him to a bar and plying him with alcohol for the amusement of patrons.
By 13, Simmons was smoking marijuana and swilling hard liquor.
He dabbled with mushrooms, cocaine and LSD, and broke into cars and homes.
About 2 a.m. on Sept. 9, 1993, Simmons and Charles Benjamin, then 15, found an open window at the home of Crook, a neighbor near St. Louis.
Crook was sleeping alone inside; her husband Steven _ like her, a trucker _ was away on the road.
Simmons bound her and forced her _ wearing only underwear and cowboy boots _ into her van.
They drove 26 kilometers (16 miles) to Castlewood State Park, led her to the middle of the trestle above the Meramec and tossed her into the water.
Two fishermen found the body 12 hours later.
He was arrested the next day.
Crook's death, he said, is "not something that can be easily blocked out."
"I have a picture in my mind that she can't see, she can't speak, she can't scream out," Crook's daughter, Kimberly Hawkins, said at Simmons' trial.
"I can imagine the terror that she's thinking."
Prosecutors called the crimes anything but impulsive.
They said Simmons believed he could escape punishment because he was a juvenile.
Simmons later claimed that any scheming was "just stupid talk," and he denied ever believing he could get away with it because he was a minor.
He was sentenced to death in 1994.
Benjamin, tried separately as an adult but not eligible for the death sentence, given his age, was convicted and sentenced to life without parole.
In a recent interview with The Associated Press, Benjamin, now 26, said he hopes Simmons prevails, thinking adolescence mitigates culpability.
"I believe age should factor in some way _ not the death penalty," Benjamin said from prison.
``I'm talking about the deterrent value of the existing rule.''
Waxman replied that deterrence does not work with juvenile offenders because they ``are impulsive and subject to peer pressure.''
But Kennedy responded that many 17-year-old offenders were ``ringleaders'' in brutal, calculated murders, according to a friend-of-the-court brief filed by a group of states that wish to retain a death penalty for juveniles.
The new term is dominated by criminal justice matters, with cases involving the death penalty for juveniles, medical marijuana, drug-sniffing police dogs during routine traffic stops, and the continued detention of Cubans brought over during the Mariel boat-lift who finished their prison sentences but cannot be returned to Cuba because Fidel Castro will not take them back.
sexual harassment), it covers intentionally discriminatory retaliation," the government states.
"Teachers and coaches are often in a much better position to identify sex discrimination and express opposition to it than are the students who are denied equal educational opportunities."
The school board counters that courts should not read into Title IX a right to sue that is not explicitly stated in the statute.
The case is Jackson v. Birmingham Board of Education.
The court is expected to render by the summer its decisions in the approximately 80 cases it will hear between October and April.
The coming term marks the 11th consecutive one with the same nine justices, further extending this panel's modern record for Supreme Court stability.
Three months ago, the Supreme Court issued an opinion that seemed to outlaw the way much of the nation sentences criminals.
Then they went on vacation, leaving judges, prosecutors, and thousands of defendants confused about what to do.
As the justices return to work Monday, their first task is to belatedly explain the new rules.
But before the court can take on the new issues, it will revisit its 5-to-4 decision last term in Blakeley v. Washington.
The U.S. government supports Jackson's position in a legal brief filed with the court.
In that case, it struck down guidelines under which judges add time to the normal range for a sentence based on aggravating facts not found beyond a reasonable doubt by a jury - for example, increasing the penalty for a kidnapping conviction if the offense involved cruel mistreatment of a victim.
The majority said such a system violates the Constitution's guarantee of a jury trial.
Because as many as 21 states and the federal government use a similar arrangement, the ruling cast much of the criminal justice system into doubt and had an immediate impact on thousands of open cases.
But the justices neglected to explain the implications of their decision, and lower courts have come up with wildly different interpretations of what it meant.
"They went off for three months on vacation, leaving a lot of people scrambling to figure out how to make the system work," said Julie O'Sullivan, a law professor at Georgetown University.
"That struck me as an irresponsible and arrogant thing to do.
They have to decide just how much remains of the federal sentencing system."
Seeking an opinion that will clear up the confusion, the federal government asked for expedited review of the cases of Duncan Fanfan and Freddie J. Booker, both convicts challenging their guideline-set sentences.
At risk is the whole system of judges examining the facts after a basic jury verdict to come up with sentences that distinguish between bad and worse instances of a crime.
"Just as Title IX's broad prohibition against intentional discrimination covers other forms of intentional discrimination to which the statute does not specifically refer (e.g.
"If schools and other defendants could freely retaliate against those who protest discriminatory treatment, they would effectively be engaging in the discrimination prohibited by the statute," Jackson wrote.
But that defense victory could prove Pyrrhic: Analysts say legislatures could respond by imposing harsher mandatory sentences.
Raich suffers from a variety of chronically painful medical conditions, including scoliosis, joint dysfunction, headaches, multiple chemical sensitivities, asthma and seizures.
In a case on marijuana, the justices will consider whether Congress overstepped its authority by outlawing marijuana use for medicinal purposes when the plant is grown in the same state where it is prescribed.
The 9th U.S.
Circuit Court of Appeals has ruled that the federal Controlled Substances Act cannot be enforced against two California residents who were prescribed marijuana to treat debilitating medical conditions.
The San Francisco-based court said Congress' constitutional authority to regulate interstate commerce cannot be invoked to outlaw the medicinal use of marijuana grown, prescribed and used in the same state.
Appealing that decision to the justices, the government says Congress can outlaw the intrastate use of dangerous drugs even if state law allows doctors to prescribe them.
It argues the use of illegal drugs cannot be confined to one state, but rather inevitably spills over into interstate trade, which Congress can regulate.
"Local manufacturing, possession and use of controlled substances increase the demand for such drugs, which in turn leads to increased supply and marketing to users," the government states in papers filed with the high court.
The California residents counter that using marijuana on a limited, as medically necessary basis has no significant impact on the interstate drug trade.
In addition, Congress tramples on states' rights when it seeks to regulate the use of a drug that state law says may be prescribed for certain medical conditions, Angel Raich and Diane Monson state in papers filed with the justices.
Monson suffers from a degenerative spinal disease that causes chronic back pain and painful muscle spasms.
Accordingly, the U.S. Education Department has adopted regulations that protect teachers who complain about illegal bias, Jackson states in papers filed with the justices.
They each have been prescribed marijuana to relieve the pain, which is permitted under California's 1996 Compassionate Use Act.
Eight other states have enacted similar "medical marijuana" laws, including Alaska, Colorado, Hawaii, Maine, Nevada, Oregon, Vermont and Washington.
The case is Ashcroft v. Raich.
In a coaching case testing civil rights, Roderick Jackson claims the Birmingham, Ala., Board of Education fired him in 2001 as a high-school girls basketball coach after he protested to supervisors that his team was not receiving the same funding and access to athletic facilities as the boys' squad.
Jackson sued the board, claiming that his retaliatory firing violated Title IX of the federal 1972 Education Amendments, which requires equal treatment of boys and girls teams in scholastic sports.
The U.S. District Court for Northern Alabama dismissed Jackson's lawsuit, saying Title IX has no provision allowing people to sue for retaliatory actions by school officials.
The Atlanta-based 11th U.S.
Circuit Court of Appeals agreed.
In his appeal to the Supreme Court, Jackson argues that the right to sue for retaliation is implicit in any anti-discrimination law.
If the court strikes down guidelines, many current defendants could receive only a minimum sentence.
The arguments Monday will kick off a near-record 10th term for the court without a lineup change.
Death-penalty states during the past decade have moved to abolish the punishment as applied to minors, and the number of killers under age 18 sentenced to death has dropped from 14 in 1999 to two last year, the lawyers said, citing data from statistician Victor Streib.
In both the state and federal systems, sentencing guidelines provide a starting point for calculating a criminal sentence, and judges then make findings about a variety of factors to determine how much time a defendant will actually serve.
In Ashcroft v. Reich, the court will consider whether federal agents lack authority to interfere with medical marijuana grown by seriously ill people who do not take it across state lines.
California voters legalized medicinal marijuana in state law eight years ago, but it remains illegal under federal law.
The US Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, a generally liberal court based in San Francisco, ruled that home-grown and home-consumed marijuana is not related to interstate commerce, and so the Constitution does not give Congress the authority to regulate it.
That invokes the same reasoning that conservative majorities on the Supreme Court have used to strike down federal laws against guns in schools and violence against women.
But the Supreme Court frequently reverses the Ninth Circuit and has consistently rejected challenges to federal drug laws.
"This represents another case in an ongoing battle between the Supreme Court and the Ninth Circuit, and the Ninth Circuit is playing games," said Michael Gottesman, a law professor at Georgetown.
"If you play games and the other side is the Supreme Court, you're not going to win."
The Supreme Court opens its new term Monday faced with urgent business and looming uncertainty.
The justices' most pressing task is to resolve the fate of the federal criminal sentencing system, which the court itself threw into limbo in June by declaring unconstitutional a similar, although not identical, system used by the state of Washington.
The Supreme Court ruled in Blakely v. Washington that the state system violated the constitutional right to trial by jury by permitting judges to make these essential findings.
In Illinois v. Caballes, the court will decide whether police may search a car with a drug-sniffing dog during a routine traffic stop without an individualized reason to be suspicious.
Federal judges around the country quickly started ruling that they could no longer treat the federal sentencing guidelines as binding.
Whether that judgment is correct and, if so, what should happen next will be the subject of an unusual afternoon argument on Monday in two cases that the justices -- in August -- granted at the Justice Department's request and agreed to expedite for an argument.
While the sentencing cases alone -- United States v. Booker, No.
04-104, and United States v. Fanfan, No.
04-105 -- would mark this as an unusually important term for criminal law, the justices have also agreed to decide a significant death penalty case.
The question in Roper v. Simmons, No.
03-633, is whether executing someone convicted of committing a capital murder at the age of 16 or 17 offends "evolving standards of decency in a civilized society."
That is the test the court applies to decide whether a punishment is "cruel and unusual" within the meaning of the Eighth Amendment.
In 1988, the court prohibited the execution of those whose crimes were committed at 15 or younger, but refused the next year to extend that decision to 16- and 17-year-olds.
The case hinges on what expectation of privacy people driving in their car have.
The emerging trend of looking abroad for comparative input has drawn fire from conservatives, who say only domestic law should be relevant.
Few expect the aging panel to remain intact another four years, so the upcoming presidential election's most long-lasting impact may be in deciding who gets to nominate multiple replacements, thus transforming its current balance into a controlling ideological majority.
One case of local interest is Smith v. Massachusetts, which comes from a 1996 shooting in Boston's Jamaica Plain neighborhood.
In the meantime, the justices have filled half the term's calendar and continue to review other appeals; one closely watched potential case is a challenge to Florida's ban on gay adoptions.
Rulings will be issued by the end of the term in June.
No terrorism case is on the calendar following the court's historic decision in that arena last term, when it sharply curtailed President Bush's claimed wartime power to indefinitely imprison suspected terrorists beyond the reach of judicial review.
But there are several cases dealing with the detention and deportation of noncitizens.
In Clark v. Martinez and Benitez v. Bozos, for example, the court will decide whether the government can continue to indefinitely imprison Cuban criminals from the 1980 Mariel boat-lift who were never granted legal entry into the United States, but were "paroled" into the country.
Having committed crimes and served out their sentences, they face deportation.
But Cuba refuses to accept them, so they and about 900 others are locked up in limbo.
In 2001, the court ruled that detaining legal immigrants for more than six months was unconstitutional.
This case will decide whether people who have not legally entered the country have the same rights.
The court must decide whether defendant Melvin Smith's "double jeopardy" protection against successive prosecution was violated when a judge first granted a defense motion to declare him not guilty of a charge, then withdrew that verdict and allowed the charge to go to a jury.
Because nearly the entire world has outlawed the juvenile death penalty, court watchers are interested in whether justices will cite foreign practices, as some did when striking down sodomy laws two years ago.
A Connecticut case, Kelo v. New London, will determine whether a government can use eminent domain to clear space for private redevelopment.
The Fifth Amendment limits the power to force unwilling owners to sell in cases where the property will be put to "public use," usually for something like a road.
Here, a neighborhood would be razed for the "public purpose" of generating greater tax revenue.
Roper v. Simmons presents the court with an opportunity to strike down the death penalty for crimes committed by a juvenile.
The case arrives two years after its decision to strike down the death penalty for mentally retarded criminals.
The court had upheld both policies in 1989.
In reversing course for criminals with diminished mental abilities, it reasoned that society's evolving standard of decency had reached a consensus that such criminals were less culpable than people of normal intelligence and so executing them
is considered "cruel and unusual punishment" prohibited by the Eighth Amendment.
Challengers to the juvenile death penalty similarly argue that the number of death sentences for offenses committed by minors has dwindled and there is a growing reluctance to carry out such executions.
(Optional add ends)
Countering the state, Simmons' lawyers argue that the Missouri court merely followed the justices' test for determining whether decency standards have evolved sufficiently to warrant a change in applying the death penalty.
Kennedy said the brief was ``chilling reading.''
A decision is expected by July.
States that permit it ``are not just alone in this country, they are alone in the world,'' he said.
On this point, Kennedy appeared to sympathize with Waxman, asking Missouri state solicitor James Layton, ``There seems to be a very substantial demonstration that world opinion is against us.
...
Does that have a bearing on what's `unusual''' punishment?
Layton replied that ``what matters'' is American legislation.
O'Connor's only remark also hinted at some openness to Waxman's position.
Addressing Layton, she noted that the number of states that either do not have capital punishment or set the age at 18 is ``about the same'' as the number of those that banned executing the retarded in 2002, which was 30.
``There is no inexorable trend here,'' Layton replied.
The case is Roper vs. Simmons.
The Supreme Court struggled Wednesday over whether the time has come to end the death penalty for young murderers.
Waxman said there was no inconsistency, because ``what was at issue in that case was the competency to decide,'' while the question in this case is ``factors why adolescents are less morally culpable.''
Now that Iran and Congo say they have repudiated the practice, the United States stands alone in the world in sanctioning the execution of minors.
Two years ago, the court in a 6-3 decision abolished capital punishment for the mentally retarded, saying that a ``national consensus'' had emerged that executing such persons amounted to cruel and unusual punishment.
They noted that all but a handful of states had exempted mentally retarded persons from the death penalty.
On Wednesday, the justices debated whether a similar national consensus exists that now calls for limiting capital punishment to murderers who are age 18 or above when they commit crimes.
Despite the vote of two years ago, it was not clear from Wednesday's argument that a majority would exempt youthful killers.
Justice Anthony M. Kennedy said he was worried that teenage criminals will be emboldened if they are free from the full force of the criminal law.
``Juveniles run in gangs,'' he said, reasoning that gang members would dodge the death penalty by recruiting their youngest members as ``the hit man.''
``I'm very concerned about that,'' said Kennedy, who voted in the majority to stop the death penalty for mentally retarded individuals.
Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, the other swing vote, noted that several states in recent years have raised the minimum age to 18 for imposing the death penalty.
He also urged the court to act based on a ``worldwide consensus'' against the death penalty for juveniles, noting that except for the United States, all 110 countries that retain capital punishment do not apply it to those under 18.
``They flip-flopped,'' Kennedy said.
Currently, most states either have no death penalty law or set 18 as the minimum age.
The best evidence for that, the court ruled, was that the number of states banning the death penalty for the retarded had grown from two to 13.
Kennedy's vote is crucial because four justices, John Paul Stevens, David Souter, Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Stephen Breyer, have already declared their belief that executing those who commit crimes while under the age of 18 is ``cruel and unusual punishment.''
The records of Chief Justice William Rehnquist and Justices Antonin Scalia and Clarence Thomas suggest that they think the issue should be left up to the states.
That leaves only Kennedy and Justice Sandra Day O'Connor as possible fifth votes for a ban.
O'Connor was mostly silent in Wednesday's hearing.
The Supreme Court upheld capital punishment for 16- and 17-year-old offenders in 1989.
It banned it for those 15 and under in 1988.
Until now, the court's position has been unaffected by its 2002 decision to ban the death penalty for the moderately mentally retarded.
In that case, Kennedy and O'Connor joined Stevens, Souter, Ginsburg and Breyer.
The court found that a national consensus against the practice had formed since 1989.
Many death penalty opponents immediately recognized that a similar argument could be applied to juveniles.
But Kennedy noted that the American Psychological Association -- which told the court in a brief in this case that adolescents were too immature to qualify for capital punishment -- had also said in a case about parental notification for abortion that teen-agers were old enough to make such a decision on their own.
Yet in the 2002 opinion, written by Stevens, the court seemed to warn that it was not ready for that, contrasting the strong trend against executing the retarded with the fact that, between 1989 and 2002, only two states had raised their death penalty ages to 18.
Three times in the last two years, the court refused to hear appeals from death-row inmates who had killed while juveniles -- despite a strongly worded dissent in one case from Stevens, Souter, Ginsburg and Breyer.
Last year, the court actually reinstated the death penalty of a juvenile offender in Oklahoma after a federal appeals court had blocked it.
The vote was 5 to 4, with both Kennedy and O'Connor in the majority.
The court intervened in the Simmons case only after the Missouri Supreme Court threw out Simmons' sentence last year on the grounds that the 1989 precedent had, indeed, been superseded by the 2002 case.
Waxman pressed a similar argument Wednesday.
He told the court that the execution of juvenile criminals conflicts with a ``robust consensus'' reflected in the recent decisions of several states to ban the practice and in the decreasing frequency with which juries actually impose the death penalty on those under 18.
Scientific evidence shows that areas of the brain in charge of judgment and impulse control are incomplete in adolescents, he said.
Death is the wrong punishment for crimes that reflect ``the transient psychosocial characteristics that rage in adolescents,'' Waxman said.
``It's about the same consensus that existed on mental retardation,'' she said, in a hopeful sign for the foes of capital punishment.
Still, 19 states permit prosecutors to seek a death sentence for murderers who are 16 or 17, although fewer have done so of late.
The attorney general also disputes that a national consensus has emerged against executing childhood offenders, saying it has become increasingly common during the past decade for violent young offenders to be tried and sentenced as adults.
Attorneys for the man, Christopher Simmons, are urging the Supreme Court to do for youngsters on death row what it did two years ago for condemned killers who have mental retardation.
For release Sunday, Oct. 3
WASHINGTON -- The death penalty, drugs and civil rights are before the Supreme Court in its new term, which begins Monday with relatively little public notice amid the presidential campaign's final month.
While President Bush and Sen. John Kerry, D-Mass., pound away at each other on the stump, the nine justices will start their session at 10 a.m. with the court's marshal saying, "God save the United States and this honorable court."
But the calm of the courtroom is probably what the deliberative justices would prefer this fall, just four years after a presidential election in which they attracted global attention and essentially cast the deciding vote.
"They (the justices) are probably perfectly happy that people are concerned about other things," said attorney Theodore Olson, who argued Bush's case in the 5-4 decision in Bush v. Gore that ended the Florida recount, sealing Bush's victory.
The justices, however, would not shy away if this year's election also arrived at their doorstep, added Olson, who served from 2001 until July as U.S. solicitor general, President Bush's top lawyer before the high court.
The justices this year have already shown that they are not afraid to revisit earlier rulings.
In taking the case of a man convicted of murder when he was 17, the court will reconsider its 1989 decision in Stanford v. Kentucky that the Constitution permits the execution of 16-year-old killers.
To raise that minimum age, the court would need to decide that a national consensus has emerged since that year that it is cruel and unusual to execute murderers who had not reached adulthood when they committed their crime.
In 2002, it overturned a 1989 ruling that had permitted executing the mentally retarded, saying that a national consensus had emerged that executing such people violated the Eighth Amendment prohibition on cruel and unusual punishment.
The justices will meet behind closed doors later this week to vote on the case of Roper vs. Simmons.
It based its decision largely on the growing number of death-penalty states to have outlawed such executions: up from two in 1989 to 16 in 2002.
But Missouri Attorney General Jay Nixon says the court should hold fast to its decision allowing the execution of minors.
Some killings are so heinous as to warrant not only charging minors as adults -- as is often the case today -- but to hold them to the ultimate penalty as well, he argues.
Simmons was convicted and sentenced to death in 1993, when he was 17, for forcing Shirley Crook from her bed, tying her hands and legs together with electric cable, covering her face with duct tape and pushing her from a railroad trestle into a river below, where she drowned.
The Missouri Supreme Court last year upheld the conviction but threw out the death sentence, saying that to execute someone for crimes committed before reaching age 18 would be cruel and unusual in light of current societal standards.
The justices will hear arguments in the Missouri case, Roper v. Simmons, on Oct. 13 and render their decision by the summer.
(Optional add begins)
Nixon, pressing Missouri's appeal to the justices, assails that ruling as violating the U.S. Supreme Court's still valid decision from 1989 that executing 17 year olds is permissible.
Though the Missouri court might feel times have changed, it must continue to rely on the justices' determination, he writes in the state's appeal.
A ruling is due in several months.
Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist and Justices Antonin Scalia and Clarence Thomas have said the court should leave the issue to the states.
In 1999, for example, 14 underage murderers received death sentences, but the number has declined steadily.
If the age for capital punishment needs to be changed, it should be done by elected lawmakers, not judges, he said.
Only two teenage murderers received death sentences last year and only one such sentence has been handed down this year.
The clear leader remains Texas.
As of June 30, 72 people who were 16 or 17 at the time of their crimes sat on death rows around the nation, and 28 of them were in Texas.
The case before the court Wednesday came from Missouri.
It concerned Christopher Simmons, who in 1993 abducted a woman in his neighborhood, bound her in duct tape and threw her alive into a river from a railroad bridge.
He was 17 at the time of the murder and bragged to a friend that he would get off because of his age.
Instead, a jury outside St. Louis convicted him and sentenced him to die.
The Missouri Supreme Court voided the death sentence and ordered him to spend life in prison, and the state attorney general filed an appeal.
James Layton, a Missouri state attorney, urged the justices to let juries weigh each case and decide for themselves when a murderer deserves death.
``Age is a legislative question.
Four justices -- John Paul Stevens, David H. Souter, Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Stephen G. Breyer -- have said in the past they believe such executions are a ``shameful practice'' and should be abolished.
It is the kind of fact a legislature should decide, not this court,'' he argued.
Seth Waxman, the former U.S. solicitor general in the Clinton administration, argued for Simmons and he urged the high court to set a constitutional rule that limits capital punishment to those who are legally adults.
In law, ``18 is the bright line between childhood and adulthood,'' he said.
Since young people need to be age 18 to vote, to join the military, to gamble, or even to marry without their parents' consent, it is reasonable to set 18 as the minimum age for capital punishment, he said.
``We are literally alone in the world'' in permitting the executions of those who committed crimes as juveniles, Waxman said.
The United Nations Commission on Human Rights said six nations besides the United States executed juvenile offenders during the 1990s.
They are Congo, Iran, Nigeria, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia and Yemen.
But its report said all of these countries have repudiated the practice in the past five years.
A long list of other groups, including the American Medical Association, the American Psychological Association, the U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops, the European Union and Nobel Prize laureates led by former President Carter, filed briefs urging the court to halt the execution of young offenders.
The US Supreme Court on Wednesday heard arguments on the legality of the death penalty for criminals aged under 18 in a case that has received international attention.