Times staff writers Debora Vrana and Evelyn Iritani contributed to this report.
One hundred roads and highways in Los Angeles County were closed because of flooding and rock slides, clogging traffic.
One hundred roads and highways in Los Angeles County were closed because of flooding and rock slides, clogging traffic.
About 12 people were known to be missing.
The roads in Los Angeles County were equally frustrating.
The latest storm had left up to 6 1/2 feet of snow in the Sierra and 2 1/2 feet in the Reno area.
Ventura County officials reported Sunday that a 20-year-old man died north of Ojai as he tried to cross a rain-gorged creek Saturday, wearing a harness attached to a wire.
The vehicle ended up in the ocean, said sheriff's Lt. Randall Dickey of the Malibu-Lost Hills station.
Downtown Los Angeles has had more than 15 inches of rain since Jan. 1, more than its average rainfall for an entire year, including 2.6 inches on Sunday, a record, the National Weather Service said.
Downtown Los Angeles has had more than 15 inches of rain since Jan. 1, more than its average rainfall for an entire year, including 2.6 inches on Sunday, a record, the National Weather Service said.
and then the hill came down,'' Mike Bell said.
In Malibu, a rain-related, single-vehicle crash in the 19700 block of Pacific Coast Highway left a man dead and four other people injured just before 8 a.m.
A spokesman for the Ventura County Fire Department, Joe L. Luna, said 10 people were injured and all but one or two had been taken to a hospital for treatment.
The Reno airport was closed two times in a week, the region not having seen so much snow since 1916.
La Conchita was the victim of a 600,000-ton slide in 1995 destroying or damaging 14 houses.
Times staff writers Jia-Rui Chong, Amanda Covarrubias, Richard Fausset, Wendy Thermos and Michael Muskal contributed to this story.
La Conchita was the site of a similar but smaller landslide in 1995.
La Conchita was the site of a similar but smaller landslide in 1995.
Road accidents on Sunday numbered 720, more than three times the total of the previous Sunday, when the roads were dry, the California Highway Patrol said.
Road accidents on Sunday numbered 720, more than three times the total of the previous Sunday, when the roads were dry, the California Highway Patrol said.
Also on Sunday, a motorist drowned near Malibu when he hit a mud patch on the Pacific Coast Highway and skidded off the road into the ocean.
Also on Sunday, a motorist drowned near Malibu when he hit a mud patch on the Pacific Coast Highway and skidded off the road into the ocean.
Several of the state's major arteries were closed because of snow, rock slides and weather-related accidents.
Dozens of roads and highways were closed throughout the day.
The bluffs, saturated by Pacific-borne storms that began on Friday, were known to be unstable, and Ventura County fire officials asked residents on Monday morning to leave voluntarily.
The bluffs, saturated by Pacific-borne storms that began on Friday, were known to be unstable, and Ventura County fire officials asked residents on Monday morning to leave voluntarily.
At least 12 people were known to be missing.
In that same time period, downtown Los Angeles received 4.5 inches of rain, Beverly Hills 7.8 inches, Santa Monica 4.7 inches, Chatsworth 5.8 inches, Claremont 7.5 inches and Lancaster 2.4 inches.
By Monday morning, the National Weather service reported that downtown Los Angeles received 5.16 inches since Friday and more than 2.5 inches on Sunday alone.
Emergency notifications in Ventura County indicated that all schools in the Fillmore Unified School District would be closed Monday, and Metrolink said its Ventura County line will be closed Monday because of flooding and mudslides.
Brynjegard works for the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power, which operates two plants along winding, two-lane San Francisquito Canyon Road just north of Santa Clarita.
"We ran like crazy; the mountains were sliding down around us."
In Fillmore, 145 people had to be evacuated from the El Dorado Mobile Home Park, where floodwaters began breaching their homes.
Gary Brynjegard and sons Peter, 16, and Garrison, 13, of Castaic had headed into the canyon earlier to survey damage.
A mudslide closed Highway 126 between Fillmore and Piru, and Highway 23 between Fillmore and Moorpark was closed by a massive water flow that was a quarter-mile wide.
Metrolink said its trains will not be operating from stations at Camarillo, Oxnard or Montalvo.
"We drove up to look around, then saw a mudslide and I said, We better get out of here," Brynjegard said.
"This is something we only see about every five to 10 years," National Weather Service Meteorologist Dan Keeton said of the turbulent weather.
Four adults and eight children were rescued by helicopter and taken to safety at a church at the mouth of San Francisquito Canyon.
In Saugus, firefighters led a dozen people to high ground after they were stranded on San Francisquito Canyon Road by flooding and mudslides from the rain-swelled San Francisquito Creek.
While there might be blue skies on the horizon, the relentless storm system that has hovered over Southern California since Thursday caused massive flooding, mudslides, power outages, several evacuations, school closures and disrupted commuter rail service.
The heavy rainfall is being attributed to a sluggish, low-pressure system that collided with a stream of tropical moisture from the southern Pacific known as a "Pineapple Express."
On the third consecutive day of heavy downpours Sunday, the skies dumped up to 2 inches of rain an hour in some areas -- turning some streets in hillside communities into raging rivers and stranding dozens of motorists who had to be rescued by overtaxed emergency workers.
At Sun Valley's infamous intersection -- San Fernando Road and Tuxford Street -- a swift-water rescue team plucked 20-year-old Amber Pitts from her car after she became stuck in as much as 4 feet of water at about 6 p.m.
"It was the fourth rescue we have made at that intersection (Sunday).
Luckily, she was OK," said Los Angeles Fire Department spokesman Brian Humphrey.
"That intersection is always flooded when it rains, and some people decide to try to make it through."
In the Ventura County community of Bardsdale, just south of Fillmore, resident Doug Bofolo and his family had to evacuate their house just east of Highway 23 when a massive water flow overtook his property.
Everything was floating," Bofolo said.
"We've got a 5-foot block wall and we can't even see the top of it.
This is even worse than the flooding we got in 1969."
In Santa Clarita, residents of the Polynesian Mobile Home Park at San Fernando Road and Sierra Highway were evacuated when saturated hillsides and roadbeds gave way to the nonstop flooding.
Thirty engine companies, the Urban Search and Rescue teams and county lifeguards were deployed with more than 200 firefighters responding.
"The whole (Santa Clarita) valley (was) on alert," Los Angeles County Fire Department Capt.
The Fire Department reported flooding as high as second-story windows at cabins along Bouquet Canyon in the Angeles National Forest.
By midafternoon, department resources were stretched thin and there was not much more that could be done to hold back mudslides.
Flooding was reported at Bouquet Canyon Road and Vasquez Canyon Road, causing a road closure.
Dave Peterson said during Sunday's deluge.
The rain caused a hillside to give way in the 6200 block of Gyral Drive in Sunland, damaging a home and prompting authorities to evacuate five people from three residences, Humphrey said.
Passengers are being asked to go to the Oxnard station, where buses will be provided to take them to Moorpark station.
Several Los Angeles-area radio stations were knocked off the air for hours Sunday after trouble with transmitters on Mount Wilson, which was assumed to be related to the stormy weather.
Meteorologists say Southern California has not been hit by this much rain in nearly 40 years.
The disaster was the latest caused by rain and snow that has battered California since Dec. 25.
"This one came down quickly and suddenly, and very violently," Luna said.
A helicopter took a 62-year-old man to a hospital, where he was listed in critical condition.
Part of a rain-saturated hillside gave way on Monday, sending a Mississippi-like torrent of earth and trees onto four blocks of this oceanfront town and killing two men.
An avalanche knocked a 13-year-old boy from a ski lift at the Las Vegas Ski & Snowboard Resort, 45 miles northwest of Las Vegas, said Clark County fire spokesman Bob Leinbach.
"I've lived here for almost 40 years and I've never seen anything like it," Peter Walenta, 69, of Stateline said Sunday.
Forecasters called the series of storms the snowiest in the Reno-Lake Tahoe area since 1916.
The storm wreaked havoc in Northern California and Nevada as well, piling snow deeper across the Sierra Nevada, stranding an Amtrak train, knocking out service at the Reno airport and shutting down major highways across the mountains.
Parents seeking more information should contact the school or its Web site.
It was unknown when the school will reopen, she said.
in Topanga will be closed because of storm-related road damage, said Stephanie Brady of the Los Angeles Unified School District.
Monday, Topanga Elementary School at 141 N. Topanga Canyon Blvd.
Southern California Edison, which has 4.6 million customers in a 50,000-square-mile service area in five counties, reported only minor power outages.
In Ventura, fire crews rescued six residents of the evacuated Emma Wood State Beach RV park who were trapped on a rock on the Santa Clara River bottom near the West Main Street Bridge on Sunday morning.
Pacific Gas & Electric spokesman David Eisenhauer said 11,000 customers remained without power, scattered throughout the company's service area.
"Many people have been found sightseeing," which Humphrey said was "hampering the efforts of emergency officials."
Humphrey urged people to stay off the roads if they can over the next day or two of wet weather.
The storm drew a number of curious Southlanders out to hard-hit canyon areas, further complicating the work of firefighters and other rescue workers.
The conditions of the four other people were not immediately known.
Authorities reported scores of traffic crashes and ordered scattered road closings, including the southbound side of Interstate 5 at the Pasadena Freeway because of a mudslide.
And in Los Feliz, a man was rescued from a three-story home built into a hillside in the 1900 block of Lucille Drive when a mudslide overran the patio and flowed into the house.
"We'll begin to see some normalcy come back on Tuesday, but it's still winter," said National Weather Service meteorologist Bill Hoffer.
Fire officials said the house rolled down the hill and collapsed into a pile of debris in a matter of seconds.
A two-story home collapsed in the Studio City area above the San Fernando Valley, and a 33-year-old man and his two children were pulled from the rubble with minor injuries.
A mudslide in Elysian Park buried a makeshift homeless encampment, killing one man and injuring another while they slept in a tent.
Sunday was a long day for L.A. city and county firefighters, who responded to numerous mudslides, collapses and rescues.
Elsewhere in Ventura County, Sheriff's Department officials reported flooding in the Arroyo Vista Mobile Home Park in Moorpark, where residents were evacuated.
"We should see clear to partly cloudy skies from Tuesday all the way out to Saturday."
In Bakersfield, which averages less than 6 inches of rainfall a year, the rain fell in sheets on Sunday and Monday, turning highways into long columns of vehicle-beaten spray.
It will be the last storm at least for a while and forecasters say Southern Californians will see sunshine Tuesday, ending a wave of storms.
La Conchita is a small community fronted by U.S. 101, about 60 miles north of downtown Los Angeles.
I've got to go if I'm going to save my house,`` he said.
Kathleen Wood, who has lived in the community since 1985, was taking a walk with a friend through La Conchita when the slide occurred.
''I looked up and saw a cloud of dust.
It snapped the retaining wall,`` she said.
Sam and Cynthia Ficklend, whose family had been going up to La Conchita on vacation for the last 50 years, moved to the seaside community two years ago.
They were going home to put things in crates and boxes and looking for their cat.
''We thought we'd retired to paradise,`` Cynthia Ficklend said.
The fifth day of thrashing storms took a heavy toll on Southern California as the rain swelled streams and rivers and undermined the integrity of the ground.
The toddler plunged to her death after slipping from her mother's grasp as they were being lifted to safety by rescuers, who responded when the family's vehicle became stuck in a flooded wash Sunday night.
A slackening rainfall was expected to bring some relief for evening commuters, a step up from the morning drive, which was a treacherous game of stop and go.
Delays and some closures were reported on most major roads.
Because many secondary roads were closed, traffic was forced onto the highways, further clogging the principal routes.
Where roads were open, sizable delays of more than an hour were reported in many areas.
Schools in some parts of the region were forced to close for the day.
Glendale Community College canceled evening classes because of a nearby mudslide.
An estimated 6,000 customers in Los Angeles were reported without power Monday afternoon.
The mudslide's at the other end of the street, but every time we get a torrential rain the mud flow comes right down my street.
''Now I've got to get a backhoe and try to save my own house.
``It covered the same three or four houses it hit the first time, then came across the street and hit six or seven more houses.
``We were standing on the street and just talking and somebody said, `Oh my God!'
Serious concerns remained about how the water-logged region would hold up with storms expected to continue at least through Sunday evening.
Although there appeared to be no major flooding or mudslides, the day was not without drama.
Rescue workers used snowplows, snowcats and snowmobiles to free people from a 6-mile stretch of California Highway 18 in the San Bernardino Mountains after a combination of snow, rain, sleet and fog created a 200-vehicle logjam.
Although many of those stuck along the route spent the night in their cars, there were no major injuries.
In Rosemead, rescuers plucked a woman from a wash after water carried her nearly a quarter of a mile.
San Bernardino County firefighters used a bulldozer to rescue a man from a swollen waterway.
Cities along the coast received from 1 to 4 inches of rain, while mountain regions reported as much as 8 inches.
Forecasters expected rain to continue most of Sunday before diminishing.
A flood watch remained in effect for Los Angeles, Orange, San Diego, Santa Barbara and Ventura counties, and flash flood warnings remained for San Bernardino County.
Super-saturated land tumbled down a mountain Monday in the coastal community of La Conchita, Calif., killing at least one person and injuring many more, fire officials said.
Rescuers were searching through the mud for survivors, she said.
It was unknown how many people were trapped; at least six people were taken to area hospitals.
The death brought to 10 the number of people killed in Southern California during the past weekend's storm, one of three bringing record precipitation across the state.
Mike and Barbara Bell, residents of La Conchita since 1983, said the landslide struck without warning about 1:15 p.m. PST.
The Bells, who live on a street away from the slide, said they were cleaning up mud when they heard the slide.
Earlier , Monday, the body of a 2-year-old girl was recovered in Palmdale, a high desert town in far northeastern Los Angeles County.
Authorities said the girl's mother, whose name was not released, drove around a barrier, one of several put up by county employees in the area because of dangerously swirling creek waters caused by two weeks of stormy weather.
Los Angeles will get a much-needed break early Monday from the unforgiving rain that has pounded Southern California since Thursday, but a new front will move in Monday night, bringing with it an additional 2 inches to 4 inches of rain.
Mudslides have closed freeways and caused evacuations and some deaths.
Even as skies cleared on Tuesday, 4,000 people were evacuated from the banks of a surging creek in the Orange County communities of San Juan Capistrano and Dana Point.
And a hiker who had been trapped for three days in a cave by raging floodwaters in the San Bernardino Mountains was rescued by helicopter.
Among the dead across the region were a man whose body was found wedged in a tree in a canyon, a woman who was run over by her husband, who could not see her in the driving rain, and an 18-year-old woman who was killed when her car hit a fallen tree.
The New York Times said in an editorial for Wednesday, Jan. 12:
Here we are, three weeks into winter, and the season has delivered almost every kind of weather it has to deliver: waterspouts off Ventura, Calif., ice storms in the central Plains, glacial fog in the Texas Panhandle, profound depths of snow in the Sierra Nevada, flooding in the Ohio Valley and an all too familiar mix of ice, snow and rain in the Northeast.
Nowhere has winter been more impressive this year than in Southern California.
The numbers do not really convey the effect of all that water, combined with powerful storm surges along the coast.
Every creek and river -- dry streambeds for most of the year -- has swollen to a dangerous tide of dark water.
Michael Handley said cars are swept away all too often when people mistakenly think they can ford swollen waterways in the area.
Vast stretches of the Mojave Desert have been inundated by the unstinting rain.
In the Central Valley, water stands in the fields, washing out the hope of some crops.
About 12,000 Los Angeles residents were without power, officials said.
Good weather will hit Southern California later this week, and the Northeast has enjoyed some mild intervals.
And this much moisture in the arid West always promises good news, despite the chaotic way it has come.
But no matter how good the weather gets for a few days in mid-January, the bulk of winter lies ahead.
It's hard to imagine what it may bring.
The collapse of the hillside here was a deadly coda to five days of merciless rains across Southern California that have left 20 dead and driven thousands from their homes under threat of floods and mudslides.
Rescuers pulled three more bodies from the mud on Tuesday, bringing the official death count to six.
He was yelling, 'I have to get my kids!
"He ran up there and started digging with his hands.
''It happens all the time,`` he said.
''I don't know what it is, the lemming mentality or something.
They're so intent on getting where they're going that they think they can drive through the flood waters.``
According to the weather service, Los Angeles has received almost 21 inches of precipitation since July 1.
That surpasses the average annual rainfall of 15.14 inches with five months yet to go.
The rain was expected to let up Monday afternoon, , but the region will have little time to dry out.
Substantial rains were forecast for Monday night and through Tuesday.
A real break was expected by Wednesday, when clearing should take place for a few days at least.
Rescue workers using sensitive listening devices and cadaver dogs probed for buried victims on Tuesday in a 25-foot-deep mountain of mud and debris left by Monday's mudslide as the rains finally ended and desperate family members kept vigil.
Bob Roper, the Ventura County fire chief, said Tuesday afternoon that monitoring equipment was still picking up faint sounds of life from the debris pile, raising the possibility of survivors.
"We're looking for any movement," Capt.
Conrad Quintana of the county fire department said.
Any indication someone is alive in there."
The missing included the wife and three children of Jimmie Wallet, a carpenter who left them briefly on Monday just before a 500-foot-high rain-saturated hillside above this tiny coastal hamlet collapsed.
"He was running toward the mountain while people were running away from it," said Wallet's mother, Linda Silva, who came to La Conchita on Tuesday to await word of her daughter-in-law and grandchildren.
Officials said they were concerned about the possibility of more mudslides.
Rescuers expected to work through the night searching for the missing people.
"It's very sad," said Kirk Peterson, who has lived here for a year and whose house was undamaged.
Meteorologists say Southern California has not been hit by this much rain in nearly 40 years.
Based in Omaha, Neb., it is one of two railroads that ferry goods from the ports of Los Angeles and Long Beach -- the world's busiest port complex -- north and east to the rest of the country.
The other is Burlington Northern Santa Fe Corp.
About half of the raw materials and finished goods that arrive at the Los Angeles and Long Beach ports, mostly from Asia, are transported by truck to destinations in Southern California.
The rest is forwarded nationwide by rail, with Union Pacific and Burlington Northern each handling about half of that freight.
Burlington Northern suffered no major setbacks from the storms, a spokesman said, and is carrying some freight for Union Pacific.
Some analysts wondered why the nasty weather affected Union Pacific and not Burlington Northern.
In the Cajon Pass, for instance, the railroads' tracks nearly parallel each other west of Interstate 15.
But Union Pacific tracks are higher in elevation than Burlington Northern's are, Union Pacific spokesman John Bromley said, and thus were first to be hit by mudslides.
The damage was even more pronounced, Bromley said, because ``the slides have occurred in areas where we've had all the forest fires and the ground cover was burned off.''
Union Pacific's stock fell 38 cents Wednesday to $63.96 on the New York Stock Exchange.
Part of a rain-saturated hillside gave way on Monday, sending a Mississippi-like torrent of earth and trees onto four blocks of this oceanfront town and killing three men.
A helicopter took a 62-year-old man to a hospital, where he was listed in critical condition.
At least three or four people were pulled alive from the debris over the course of the day, including a woman in the early evening who was "pretty seriously injured," Eric Nishimoto, a spokesman for the Ventura County sheriff's department, said.
"This one came down quickly and suddenly, and very violently," Luna said.
Fifteen to 20 homes were hit, he said.
Union Pacific, which was suffering major congestion problems on its tracks before the heavy rainfall, is the nation's largest railroad, with 33,000 miles of track from the West to the Midwest.
Husing said the ``real damage is the continuing problems we have, whether it's 93 ships tied up off the coast or Union Pacific not being able to get its cargo through the area.''
Decisions like that and Union Pacific's not-infrequent difficulties, in addition to bottlenecks at the ports, ``certainly should cause people to think about the whole infrastructure'' in Southern California, said Jim McKenna, president of the Pacific Maritime Association, which represents West Coast shipping lines.
His wife, Dawn, said, "We're hoping they're not buried."
Firefighters had to break a window in the home in the 1900 block of North Lucile Avenue to reach the man, who was uninjured.
The fire department also evacuated three other nearby homes.
In Tujunga, five people were evacuated from the 6200 block of Gyral Drive after a mudslide near the Angeles National Forest, Humphrey said.
No one was injured, though one house was damaged.
People in 15 houses farther down the street were advised to leave.
``Most of the incidents are minor, and people do their civic duty with shovels in the mud.''
Mother Nature might be to blame for Union Pacific's latest woes, but the recurring problems the railroad has had moving goods in and out of the region, coupled with recent backlogs at local ports, could threaten the economy, shipping experts and economists said.
The fresh disruption -- coming on top of last year's gridlock at local ports and railways -- persuaded APL to decide to permanently send ``a lot of our transcontinental cargo'' to Seattle rather than Los Angeles, he said.
``If I'm a shipper, I'm starting to get disturbed about being able to use Southern California as a base to get stuff into the country and out to my stores,'' said John Husing, an independent economist in Redlands, Calif.
Citing mudslides and washed-out tracks and bridges, Union Pacific closed four of its five main rail lines out of the Los Angeles Basin.
That brought the railroad's freight traffic in the region to a near standstill.
The company said it was racing to make track repairs and hoped to resume limited service on Thursday.
Union Pacific's troubles included 23 mudslides that covered tracks in the Cajon Pass east of Los Angeles, a key passageway from Southern California to Las Vegas and Salt Lake City, and eventually to the Midwest.
``We have been told that the route from Los Angeles to Chicago has effectively been closed,'' said Scott Dailey, a spokesman for APL, a leading shipper of intermodal cargo containers and a unit of Neptune Orient Lines of Singapore.
The disaster was the latest problem caused by the rain and snow that have battered California since Dec. 25.
Officials said they were concerned about the possibility of more mudslides.
``Choose your street with `Canyon' in the name, and that likely has been impacted by mud.''
Rescuers expected to work through the night searching for the missing people.
He said Los Angeles had not seen such intensity and such a pattern of winter downpours since the fall and winter of 1889-90.
Patzert said that the snowpack in the north could help bolster water supplies for Southern California but that the torrential rains would not slake the longstanding drought. "
It's like trying to fill a glass full of water when someone is shooting a fire hose at you," he said.
Southern California, it is widely said, has two seasons: fire and flood.
Landslides are not freak occurrences.
Even then, despite warnings to leave, some residents stayed.
After the slide on Monday, evacuation was made mandatory.
Usually sunny southern California has been whipped the past few days by storms that have killed at least two and caused floods, mudslides, power blackouts and deadly traffic accidents.
A man died and another was injured in Los Angeles' Elysian Park when a hillside collapsed and buried the two in the tent in which they were sleeping on Saturday night, officials said.
The victims "were sleeping in a tent at the top of the hill when the hill gave way," Los Angeles Fire Department spokesman Brian Humphrey said.
A man and his two children were rescued from the rubble of their hillside home in Studio City after it collapsed in a heavy downpour.
The three were taken to hospital with minor injuries.
Residents of Santa Clarita had to be evacuated due to floods while the Coldwater Canyon neighborhood of Los Angeles was strewn with fallen trees.
The latest storm started Thursday and was predicted to continue Monday with more rain and, in the mountains, snow.
Hundreds of cars were stranded in the snow in San Bernardino National Forest, east of Los Angeles.
The downpours are part of the fundamentally chaotic and occasionally extreme nature of the atmosphere, said William Patzert, an oceanographer at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena.
More than 6,000 houses were without power on Monday in Los Angeles, where county officials estimate the property damage is in excess of $19 million.
On Friday, Las Vegas was coated in a freak snow squall.
"Most people chose to leave, but a few did not," Raya said.
"It's very sad," said Kirk Peterson, who has lived here for a year and whose house was undamaged.
His wife, Dawn, said, "We're hoping they're not buried."
She said the rubble had stopped just to the side of her house but engulfed her neighbor's.
"The cops put a hole in our wall" to search for survivors next door, Wharton said.
La Conchita is a sliver of a town between the Pacific Ocean and scenic bluffs just south of the Santa Barbara County line.
About 200 complied, boarding government-provided buses, Myra Raya, a spokeswoman for the Fire Department, said.
Rescue workers, including a team from neighboring Los Angeles County, worked into the evening, combing the debris for the living and the dead and keeping a wary eye on the hillside and the sky.
A confluence of tropical air from the South Pacific and a cold front barreling down from the north have created the extraordinary weather across the West.
On Monday evening, the rain returned.
Fearing another slide, officials ordered some crews to move to the coastal highway, which was closed from Ventura and Santa Barbara.
Elsewhere, a 2-year-old drowned on Sunday in Palmdale, in the desert, after slipping from her mother's grasp when helicopter rescuers tried to lift them from a car that had been swallowed in a torrent.
The child's body was recovered a few hours later.
The authorities are considering bringing charges against the mother, whose name they did not release, because she had driven around barricades and into the rushing water.
In Los Angeles, a saturated hillside gave way in Elysian Park, burying a homeless man who was waiting out the weather in his encampment.
Around 4 p.m., ``tons of mud'' from a hillside slid into the third floor of a home in Silver Lake, , trapping a man inside, he said.
Shippers scrambled for alternative routes Wednesday as Union Pacific Corp. struggled to overcome what it said was a ``probably unprecedented'' disruption of service in Southern California because of the recent rains.
Humphrey said this was one of a number of areas where mudslides caused problems.
Southern California, it is widely said, has two seasons: fire and flood.
Forecasters had originally said some areas of southern California might receive more than 20 inches of precipitation over the weekend.
``It's stationary off the coast and constantly pumps in moist water from the south,'' he said.
The storms had stalled over an area of the Pacific Ocean on Sunday evening, a few hundred miles off the coast of Point Conception, west of Santa Barbara, said Bruce Rockwell, a weather specialist with the National Weather Service.
It's too dangerous,'' said Cindy Beavers, a spokeswoman for the San Bernardino County Sheriff's Department.
``The only way to get to the cave is to cross this water, (but) it's flowing too heavily.
Unresolved Sunday was the fate of a Highland man who remained stranded but safe in a San Bernardino County cave as raging waters outside prevented rescuers from reaching him.
In the Hollywood Hills, a family narrowly survived as their two-story home collapsed, apparently in a torrent of mud.
Dozens of people fled threatened neighborhoods from Santa Clarita to San Dimas.
For others, it was a day of close calls.
In Elysian Park, just north of downtown, a 42-year-old homeless man was killed and another injured when a mudslide swept away their makeshift encampment.
A fourth day of thrashing thunderstorms began to take a heavier toll on southern California on Sunday with at least three deaths blamed on the rain, as flooding and mudslides forced road closures and emergency crews carried out harrowing rescue operations.
After the slide on Monday, evacuation was made mandatory.
Even then, despite warnings to leave, some residents stayed.
Landslides are not freak occurrences.
"It's like trying to fill a glass full of water when someone is shooting a fire hose at you," he said.
Continued downpours were expected through Tuesday, when the jet stream airflow from the north was expected to start pushing the storm inland toward Nevada.
Patzert said that the snowpack in the north could help bolster water supplies for Southern California but that the torrential rains would not slake the longstanding drought.
He said Los Angeles had not seen such intensity and such a pattern of winter downpours since the fall and winter of 1889-90.
The downpours are part of the fundamentally chaotic and occasionally extreme nature of the atmosphere, said William Patzert, an oceanographer at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena.
More than 6,000 houses were without power on Monday in Los Angeles, where county officials estimate the property damage in excess of $19 million.
On Friday, Las Vegas was coated in a freak snow squall.
A confluence of tropical air from the South Pacific and a cold front barreling down from the north have combined to create the extraordinary weather across the West.
In Los Angeles, a saturated hillside gave way in Elysian Park, burying a homeless man who was waiting out the weather in his encampment.
The authorities are considering bringing charges against the mother, whose name they did not release, because she had driven around barricades and into the rushing water.
The child's body was recovered a few hours later.
A 2-year-old drowned on Sunday in Palmdale, in the desert, after slipping from her mother's grasp when helicopter rescuers tried to lift them from a car that had been swallowed in a torrent.
Rescue workers, including a search-and-rescue team from neighboring Los Angeles County, worked through the gloom of the fading afternoon, combing the debris for the living and dead and keeping a wary eye on the hillside and the sky.
"Most people chose to leave, but a few did not," Raya said.
About 200 complied, boarding government-provided buses, Myra Raya, a spokeswoman for the Fire Department, said.
La Conchita is a sliver of a town between the Pacific Ocean and scenic bluffs just south of the Santa Barbara County line.
Although they later reduced that estimate, a campground near Mount Wilson, Opids Camp, received 20.8 inches of precipitation just between 4 p.m. Saturday and 4 p.m. Sunday.
Hundreds of motorists skidded into minor traffic accidents.
Southern California has been drenched by a string of storms that began in late December and have been only sporadically interrupted by clear skies.
A rain-related accident on Mount Wilson tore down transmission lines, interrupting the broadcast of the Indianapolis Colts and Denver Broncos playoff game on KCBS for two hours.
The family was hospitalized with minor injuries.
Firefighters rescued the man's 10-year-son.
An unidentified motorist helped the father pull his 5-year-old daughter out of the rubble, authorities said.
On Laurel Canyon Boulevard, three people were safe after their 5,000-square-foot house collapsed, apparently the result of a mudslide.
Names and ages of the victims were not released.
Four passengers in the car sustained minor injuries, Dickey said.
The other man, who was unidentified, received minor injuries.
Humphrey said firefighters dug him out in less than 10 minutes, but he died at the scene.
The current dousing, which began Thursday, has been the heaviest.
The man, identified as Jeffrey Lynn Earwood, was trapped under hundreds of pounds of thick mud, according to Los Angles City Fire Department spokesman Brian Humphrey said.
The 42-year-old homeless man who died in Elysian Park had been living with a younger acquaintance in a tent on top of a hill on the 1700 block of Stadium Way, just north of the Pasadena Freeway.
Heavy rain fell in other parts of California, but the storms in the Southland presented the biggest challenges.
``If it gets slippery, it could potentially be dangerous to horses, jockeys and all involved,'' said park spokesman Vince Bruun.
And in Arcadia, eight of nine horse races at Santa Anita Park were canceled for the first time in 10 years because of rain.
When rescue workers arrived, they said, only one of his limbs was visible.
In Los Angeles County, the Department of Water and Power reported thousands of power outages in homes from Echo Park to Bel-Air.
More than 300 miles away in the Eastern Sierra, skiers and snowboarders glided atop 48 inches of snow that has fallen on Mammoth Mountain since Friday.
All across the Southland, residents dealt with rockslides, debris flows, downed trees, power outages and mandatory evacuations, though there were few serious injuries.
Some ski runs were closed at Big Bear Mountain Resorts because of heavy rains.
Mudslides, a sinkhole and other water damage forced Metrolink and Amtrak to cancel some train routes serving Los Angeles and Ventura Counties on Monday.
In Orange County, a combination of storm runoff and big surf caused health officials to close Corona del Mar State Beach in Newport Beach and Capistrano County Beach in Dana Point because of sewage pipe leaks.
``We've just been pounded,'' said Joani Lynch, a Mammoth Mountain spokeswoman.
A 20-year-old in Ventura County died on Sunday when he tried to cross a raging creek in a harness attached to a wire.
"Seventy-five to 80 percent will end up in the ocean."
The Sierras have had 4 feet of snow, and forecasters expect 5 feet more by midweek.
A 20-year-old in Ventura County died on Sunday when he tried to cross a raging creek in a harness attached to a wire.
The Sierras have had 4 feet of snow, and forecasters expect an additional 5 feet by midweek.
"Seventy-five to 80 percent will end up in the ocean."
Times staff writers Jason Felch, Jack Leonard, David Pierson and Joel Rubin and staff photographer Rob Gauthier contributed to this report.
Times staff writers Nancy Cleeland, Erika Hayasaki, Daniel Hernandez, Fred Alvarez, David Reyes, Seema Mehta, Jennifer Mena, Terril Jones, Eric Bailey and Eric Slater contributed to this story.
It was also struck by a major landslide in 1995.
It was silent and then it really came down.
Roads were clogged with rain and mud, and at least 720 crashes were reported Sunday, more than three times the number of accidents during the previous Sunday when streets were dry, the California Highway Patrol said.
The California Highway Patrol reported 430 accidents as of 6 p.m. in Southern California -- double last Saturday's total for the same time period.
The victim in the Malibu traffic accident died after the SUV he was traveling in skidded off the road in the 19700 block of PCH.
One person died and four people were hurt in a single-car crash on Pacific Coast Highway near Malibu.
Terrin Wharton was in her house with her husband and two children when the hill came down.
``We have one dead and numerous injuries,'' said Myrna Raya, fire information officer for the Ventura County Fire Department.
A spokesman for the Ventura County Fire Department, Joe L. Luna, said that nine people had been recovered from the wreckage of their homes and that seven of them had been taken to a hospital to be treated for injuries.
The airport in Reno, Nev., was closed twice in a week.
The region has not had so much snow since 1916.
In Malibu, on the Pacific coast, an accident caused by the rain sent a car into the ocean, leaving one dead and four wounded.
Another man was killed on Pacific Coast Highway in Malibu when his sport utility vehicle skidded into a mud patch and plunged into the Pacific Ocean.
Here in La Conchita, where as many as 12 people were missing, 14 people were also injured, two of them critically, and roughly half of the town's houses were destroyed or badly damaged.
Fire officials estimated that 100 roads in Los Angeles saw flooding, mudslides or downed trees.
Humphrey estimated that more than 100 roads in Los Angeles had seen flooding or mudslides or downed trees.
The latest storm wave on Sunday alone dumped 4 1/2 inches of rain downtown, 6 inches in Burbank and Chatsworth, 3.29 inches in Woodland Hills and nearly 8 inches in Beverly Hills.
Beverly Hills received 7.79 inches, the L.A. community of Eagle Rock 3.8 inches, Santa Monica 4.7 inches, and Chatsworth, in the San Fernando Valley, 5.81 inches.
On average, Los Angeles receives 18 inches of rain in the first six months of each year, but more than 15 inches have fallen in the first nine days of 2005.
Los Angeles has already had some 5 inches more than its annual rainfall in the last two weeks, including a record 2.6 inches on Sunday.
Forecasters extended a winter storm warning into Tuesday across the Sierra and parts of northern Nevada, where as much as 2 more feet of snow was expected.
Late Saturday, a man drowned after being washed away by a swollen river north of Ojai in Ventura County, officials said.
Los Angeles County fire rescue workers recovered the man's body about 500 feet from where the vehicle went into the water off Tuna Canyon Beach, said Lt. Randall Dickey of the Malibu Lost Hills Sheriff's Station.
The 1995 slide in La Conchita was 600,000 tons and destroyed or damaged 14 houses.
Carol Rock, Patricia Farrell Aidem and wire services contributed to this report.
As many as 12,000 DWP customers lost power Sunday morning.
Dozens of roads around the area remained closed because of mud or deep standing water.
As stormy weather continued to pound Southern California on Saturday, about 170 people were freed from cars near Big Bear where they had been trapped for up to 15 hours in deep snow, several of the state's major arteries were closed and rescue workers pulled two people from raging streams.