A 4,000-page draft environmental impact study by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers was completed last month after a nearly three-year process.
Unless the United States and the rest of the world get serious about global warming and sea-level increases, the Cape town of Orleans could be "under the waves" by 2100, according to Philip Warburg, president of the Conservation Law Foundation.
But that is no surprise, according to the Alliance to Protect Nantucket Sound, an organization that opposes the wind farm.
The proposed Nantucket Sound project would be the country's first offshore wind farm.
Army Corps officials said they specifically hired TRC as an independent third party because they have an energy background and experience with similar reports.
"TRC deals with all kinds of energy.
"The question is does the wind farm impinge on the beauty of one of the great natural resources on the East Coast, and it does."
Monday, the Army Corps of Engineers said few projects are blocked because of aesthetic considerations, in part because it is such a subjective matter.
Supporters of wind farms have called the proposed turbines "futuristic" and "beautiful," while opponents have called them a blight on an uninterrupted seascape.
A host of politicians have attempted to block the project since it was proposed three years ago.
If the Army Corps sticks to the 60-day public comment period, the agency is likely to issue a decision next year.
Construction could begin soon afterward.
"This is great news for citizens hoping to turn decades of rhetoric into action on renewable energy," Cape Wind president Jim Gordon said, referring to the report's findings.
Nickerson said TRC would be bound to write a favorable review because it works on wind issues, among others.
The $13 million draft environmental impact report was paid for by Cape Wind.
Governor Mitt Romney, who opposes the project on aesthetic grounds, says the report downplays a key consideration for Massachusetts residents.
Some 16 agencies and groups weighed in with comments and data about potential impacts the farm would have, and the Army Corps received hundreds of individual comments.
Cape Wind's involvement in the report has drawn critics, including Nickerson, who says the Army Corps was overly reliant on data collected by consultants paid for by the developer.
They also faulted the Army Corps' hiring of TRC, a national engineering firm with an office in Lowell, to help put the federal document together.
A spokeswoman for TRC said Nickerson's comments were untrue.
"I'm not surprised that the wind farm isn't going to kill fish or kill birds," said Romney.
Joan Vennochi's e-mail address is vennochiglobe.com.
Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, whose family compound would overlook the project, issued a statement saying the project shows the need for better rules to govern what he sees as the bequeathing of public ocean to private interests.
As the clock begins ticking Tuesday toward a final decision on the proposed wind farm in Nantucket Sound, its chief opponent said the government should allow more time for public response to a crucial 4,000-page report that appears to pave the way for its approval.
The power comes from a combination of wind and landfill-produced natural gas.
"We haven't seen major evidence of increased interest in a renewable product," Robb said, noting that about 1,400 customers have signed on to its plan.
"We could offer such a plan in Houston next year if we find customer demand, but we haven't gone to the expense of marketing the plan."
There are no other renewable energy plans offered in the Houston area.
Spokesmen for Entergy and TXU note that renewable sources are part of their mix of power generation.
TXU is the fourth largest contractor of wind power in the country, while Entergy has several hydroelectric facilities.
Green Mountain has 600,000 customers in eight states but does not offer a state-by-state breakdown.
The findings are largely favorable to the project, suggesting that the 130 turbines proposed off Cape Cod would have little or no negative effect on the surrounding air, sea, and animal life.
"The struggle has just begun," said Charles Kleekamp, vice president of Cape Clean Air, an environmental group that supports the farm.
The public has 60 days to comment on the report before the Corps issues a final version and makes a decision on the project, which is expected next year.
The report is by far the most important hurdle the controversial project must overcome before construction begins.
The draft gives the first public look at the federal government's official stance on the 460-megawatt power plant.
"A 60-day comment period during the holiday season on a complex and controversial project is unfair," said Susan Nickerson, of the alliance.
Army Corps officials said Monday they would consider written requests to extend the comment period, but had already added 15 days to the minimum required time of 45 days.
Even though few had seen the entire report by Monday afternoon, reaction was swift from opponents and supporters after details were published by news agencies and summaries of the report were leaked.
The two sides have begun lining up engineers and scientists to start poring over the document.
The idea they would be biased to any particular energy source is ridiculous," said spokeswoman Samantha Guerry.
With promises of an enormous fight brewing, both sides remained optimistic.
Massachusetts Attorney General Tom Reilly said "We cannot allow the federal government to give away 24 square miles of pristine waters to a private developer.
It was set to be released last month, but a Pentagon official asked to review it first.
A draft of the amendment, circulated this week, calls on Congress to outline environmental standards, establish requirements for competitive bidding and set public compensation for the use of waterways.
Some of those issues were raised in a report last month by the U.S. Commission on Ocean Policy, which called the current regulatory framework for offshore wind power ``inadequate.''
Sen. Edward Kennedy, D-Mass., who serves on the Armed Services Committee and whose family owns a large home on Cape Cod, has spoken out against the project and supports establishing a national policy on offshore development.
Warner, who has two daughters with summer homes on Cape Cod, wrote in a 2002 letter to Army Undersecretary Les Brownlee that ``the location of such a large project on Nantucket Sound is questionable.''
Warner said that the amendment is not related to his families ties to Cape Cod and that he is mainly concerned with providing a framework for wind-power developments in Virginia.
A company called Winergy LLC applied for an offshore wind farm permit from the Norfolk District of the Army Corps of Engineers, but that application has been withdrawn.
In New York, the Long Island Power Authority (LIPA) plans to build 40 wind turbines off southern Long Island as part of a state program that requires utilities to produce 25 percent of their energy portfolio from renewable sources by 2013.
``We would be discouraged by any effort that would prevent us from moving forward with this important project,'' LIPA Chairman Richard Kessel said.
There is a "think globally, act locally" rightness to the fact that the environmental report for the Cape Wind power project came on the same day scientists laid out the dramatic effects global warming is having on the Arctic.
The report on Cape Wind's 130-turbine proposal finds few costs to marine or bird life that might outweigh the project's benefits to both the environment and the economy.
The 454-megawatt project would provide a source of pollution-free, renewable power that could displace fossil fuel sources in the region.
Much of that increased ocean water will come from the Arctic.
As ice and snow at the poles melt, the loss of their reflective surfaces leads to exposed land and water absorbing more heat.
The four-year study by 300 international researchers advances the consensus among scientists that industrial society's increasing production of greenhouse gases, especially carbon dioxide from fossil fuels, is causing climate change.
The Bush administration has refused to take any steps to curb carbon dioxide emissions despite a promise by President Bush in 2000 to do so, and has indicated it has no plans to change that policy.
``Clearly, there are powerful forces in Congress opposed to moving this project forward.''
They say it will spoil the aesthetics of popular vacation communities, disrupt commercial fishing, and harm birds and marine wildlife.
... [W]hat is happening here is wrong."
The Cape Cod proposal has sparked a strong backlash from a coalition of wealthy and well-connected opponents, including some environmentalists.
Reliant Energy does not offer a renewable energy plan in the Houston area -- state electricity deregulation laws allow it to offer only one plan here until Jan. 1, 2005 -- but it has offered a plan to Dallas-area customers for several years.
Marc Breslow, director of the Massachusetts Climate Action Network, which supports the plan, said he had only seen a brief summary of the report Monday, but if it is accurate, "completion of a final [environmental report] should be done expeditiously, and assuming no environmental surprises, Cape Wind should move forward without further delay."
Beth Daley can be reached by email at bdaleyglobe.com
An amendment to the 2005 defense authorization bill currently before Congress could immediately halt the development of offshore wind-power facilities in the United States, including a controversial project planned for coastal Massachusetts, environmental groups and developers said this week.
The amendment is being pushed by Sen. John Warner, R-Va., who sits on the House-Senate conference committee that will write the final version of the bill.
The amendment would prevent the Army Corps of Engineers, which oversees offshore wind power, from processing permit applications until lawmakers draw up new regulatory guidelines.
Proponents of the Massachusetts project say the amendment would stifle a burgeoning industry that they believe can make the United States less reliant on polluting fossil fuels at a time of rising oil prices.
Warner, who chairs the Senate Armed Services Committee, said the amendment is necessary to address shortcomings in oversight for such projects.
``We need a more comprehensive regime, not unlike that for offshore drilling in the oil and gas industry, to protect this very important concept of wind energy, which I support,'' he said in a telephone interview.
He would not disclose whether the amendment will be included in the committee's report, which could come as soon as Friday.
Once the bill is written, no changes can be made before a vote on passage.
Although in its nascent stages in this country, wind power is widely used in Europe -- providing Denmark, for example, with about 18 percent of its energy.
The first offshore project planned for U.S. waters is a privately financed, $800 million proposal to build 130 turbines south of Cape Cod, Mass.
Cape Wind Associates, the project's developer, says that in normal weather conditions, 40-story high towers could generate 170 megawatts -- 75 percent of the power used by Cape Cod and the islands of Martha's Vineyard and Nantucket.
``This amendment would stop us dead in our tracks, putting the breaks on offshore wind energy for years to come,'' said Mark Rogers, communications director for Cape Wind.
Jim Robb, Reliant's senior vice president of retail marketing, said the renewable plan has been priced to roughly match the cost of the Dallas area's incumbent provider, TXU.
Because the company must buy some power on the open market to meet customer needs, it is also subject to the fuel price increases imposed by its suppliers, Savage said.
If Washington cannot take the lead in coping with climate change, the least it could do is provide legislation for a better framework for wind or other renewable energy projects that use the ocean surface.
"Does the PUC have jurisdiction over a home-rule city?
Kremers, who has a quotation from Gandhi on the door of his dorm room -- "Be the change you wish to see in the world" -- considers the new state law a wonderful boost to what's happening on campus.
Fort Collins officials are more guarded.
They say that as one of a small number of "home rule" cities that run their own electric systems in Colorado, they want to opt out of the new state law because they believe their energy program is better.
It is certainly more ambitious, requiring 15 percent of the energy sold in city limits to come from wind sources by 2017, 50 percent more than the state requirement.
City officials also don't like the idea of interference by the state Public Utility Commission, which will oversee the statewide standards, and they worry as well that the Legislature could amend the plan.
The Fort Collins city council voted to remain neutral on Amendment 37 before the election.
Statewide, the measure got the support of slightly more than half the electorate -- 53.4 percent voted for it, to 46.6 percent against.
That's what people were worried about," said Michael B. Smith, the general manager of utilities for Fort Collins.
Kremers, meanwhile, is plotting how to get financing for his second-year marketing plan.
"We will be closely watching what happens."
Environmentalists who backed Amendment 37 noted that it includes specific language intended to protect Fort Collins, and other cities that might join its ranks with local standards, allowing them to self-certify out of the program.
But they also admitted that because the measure was passed as an ordinary state law, it could be amended by the Legislature -- or repealed, though hardly anyone expects that to happen -- and that the Public Utility Commission will also have to work out the details of enacting it over the next year.
"It's a statute, so the legislature can change it however it sees fit, but I would hope that since it was passed by the voice of the people, they would respect that," said the measure's principal author, Rick Gilliam, a senior energy policy adviser at Western Resource Advocates, a nonprofit environment law and policy center.
"My hope is that we would at least go forward into the PUC realm before the legislature tinkers with it."
At the university, plans are under way for next year's wind campaign.
Dollard, the utility engineer, said that one proposal would extend the wind power option to individual professors, and departments that might want to buy some or all their energy from the city's wind program.
"We sold it as zero cost, zero effort," she said.
The pitch to the administration, she said, was that wind energy would be an entirely optional added cost for students, and that the grunt work would be done by the students themselves.
"It was almost all exclusively the students doing this," said Carol Dollard, a utility engineer at the university who got involved in the residence hall project.
People like Kremers and a former student, Britta Schroeder, his predecessor at the student government's environment job, prodded and pushed until they found a way.
Kremers sold wind power to the occupants of individual dormitory rooms this fall, under a deal between the university and the local utility that environmentalists describe as one of the first such programs in the nation.
Kremers, an environmental engineering major and the associate director of environmental affairs in the student government, gave out stickers and pinwheels shaped like turbines and threw a "wind power party" to celebrate clean energy, complete with a cake connived from the dining hall.
He ultimately got 187 students -- nearly 4 percent of the university's 5,000 residence-hall population -- to sign up, paying from $17 to $52 a year extra to buy green power to run their computers and lava lamps.
"Now it's my duty to keep it going."
Colorado voters said much the same thing when they approved, over the vehement objections of most energy companies, a proposal mandating that 10 percent of the state's electricity must come from wind and solar power by 2015.
The new law, called Amendment 37, makes Colorado the 18th state with an environmentally friendly energy standard, but the first one to have bypassed the Legislature and put the rule into place through referendum.
An energy bill similar to the one the voters approved was defeated by Colorado's legislature three times in the last three years.
"Because it's a conservative Western state with a strong fossil-fuel industry, as well as the first one passed by a popular referendum, Colorado represents something of a breakthrough," said Alan Nogee, the energy program director at the Union of Concerned Scientists, a nonprofit research and advocacy group based in Cambridge, Mass.
And Fort Collins, a city of 118,000 people dominated culturally by the 25,000-student university got there first.
The city created its own wind energy program in 1998, and its own renewable energy standard in 2003 -- a step that only a few other municipalities in the nation, notably Chicago and Austin, Texas, have taken.
Under the program, about 2 percent of the city's customer base and electricity load now comes from wind power, purchased from wind farms in Wyoming through a nonprofit power authority.
The idea is that each purchase of wind power fed into the grid offsets fossil-fuel use.
Colorado gets most of its electricity from burning coal.
It was from that municipal utility framework, city and school officials say, that the dormitory project took root.
And just like Amendment 37, which clawed its way onto the ballot through petitions, what happened on the campus came entirely from the bottom up.
"It was a three-year process to get the residence halls through, so we've said let's not take on too many things until we've learned the lessons from the first part," she said.
He wants to print up advertising cards that could be put in every mailbox of next year's incoming freshman class -- about 5,000 students -- and he has a strategy in mind.
While the cost of wind power is supposed to stay relatively stable compared with power generated by coal and natural gas, Green Mountain recently increased the price of its 100 percent wind product.
"Some see it as a way to counter the country's dependence on foreign oil; others see it as a way to promote good environmental stewardship, and others see it as being consistent with their faith."
"We are quite a ways from that, actually."
Green Mountain Energy is offering Texas electricity consumers an environmentally friendly service at a rate matching that of Reliant Energy -- a sign of a growing interest in green energy and the rising price of traditionally produced power.
Touted as a "pollution free" plan, Green Mountain Energy gets the power it sells from wind turbines and hydroelectric plants and will cost about 11.1 cents per kilowatt-hour, the same price current Reliant Energy customers are paying.
Houston-area electricity customers can pay as little as 9.6 cents per kilowatt-hour, a rate offered by Houston-based Gexa Energy.
Other companies, like Starlight Electric and Cirro Energy, also offer rates below the price Reliant charges.
The Green Mountain plan, a 10 percent wind- and 90 percent water-generated mix, is about $9 per month less expensive than the 100 percent wind plan Austin-based Green Mountain currently offers, based on the use by a typical customer.
The new offering reflects a maturing of the electricity market from one where only early adopters would pay the extra money for green power to a market where renewable power is attractive to a broader range of customers, said John Savage, Green Mountain's senior vice president of marketing.
The power in Green Mountain's 100 percent wind plan comes from turbines operating in Texas, but most of the hydroelectric power in the new plan is generated in neighboring states, such as Arkansas and Oklahoma, Savage said.
The university's recycling committee, mostly composed of faculty and administration, works on issues like reducing waste in the dining halls, and he is the student representative on the board.
While the power that arrives at a Green Mountain customer's home in Texas won't necessarily be from a hydroelectric plant, Green Mountain will buy a sort of "renewable power credit" from a hydro plant that generated the electricity and sold it to another user.
Green Mountain's plan also reflects the narrowing price gap between renewable power and power made by more traditional methods, such as coal and natural gas, said Tim Morstad, an analyst with Consumers Union.
Since 2002, the price electric consumers pay to Reliant Energy, known as the price-to-beat, has gone up 28 percent, or 2.48 cents per kilowatt-hour.
Most of that is a result of rising costs, primarily natural gas.
"On the renewable front, it does bode well that customers can choose more environmentally friendly power for the price most residential customers pay," Morstad said.
"But this is also a signal that the price to beat has gotten very high."
The cost of renewable energy hasn't necessarily dropped, either.
"When you think of wind energy, people have a quaint idea of a lone windmill by the river," he said.
A wind farm of the size used in the simulation is much larger than those that have been built so far, Baidya Roy acknowledged, but it is not out of line with what is being considered as more power from renewable resources is sought.
He noted that the study was only preliminary, but that it pointed to the need to improve rotor design to reduce turbulence.
"You might see some kind of convective clouds or scattered rainfall here and there," Baidya Roy said.
"The recycling committee has a good budget," he said.
Taiwan Power Co. (Taipower) will invest more than NT$10 billion in developing wind power generation in the next 10 years, a company spokesman said Sunday.
The 10-year development plan is part of the state-owed firm's efforts to substantiate the government's eco-friendly "green power generation" policy.
Under the plan, Taipower will install at least 200 wind power generators with a total installed capacity of 300,000 kilowatts, the spokesman said, adding that the wind power generators will first be set up in coastal regions in western part of the island.
Wind turbines have been hailed as an environmentally friendly way to reduce the world's dependence on fossil fuels.
But a wind farm with hundreds or even thousands of large turbines removes an enormous amount of energy from the air.
In one of the first studies to get at that question, scientists have modeled the impact of a hypothetical large-scale wind farm in the Great Plains.
Their conclusion, reported in The Journal of Geophysical Research, is that thousands of turbines concentrated in one area can affect local weather.
The impact, said the study's lead author, Dr. Somnath Baidya Roy, comes not so much from the turbines' rotor blades slowing down the air but from atmospheric mixing that occurs in the blades' wake.
This creates warmer, drier conditions at the surface.
"We found that it's the turbulence generated by the rotor that is crucial when you talk about the impact on local meteorology," said Baidya Roy, who did the research at Princeton but is now at Duke.
The simulated wind farm in the study consisted of 10,000 turbines, with rotor blades 165 feet long, in a 60-by-60-mile grid in north-central Oklahoma.
In the Great Plains there is a nighttime stream of fast-moving air that separates cool, moist air near the ground from drier, warmer air above.
The simulation found that the turbines catch this nocturnal jet, and the ensuing turbulence causes vertical mixing.
The warming and drying that occur when the upper air mass reaches the surface is a significant change, Baidya Roy said, and is similar to the kinds of local atmospheric changes that occur with large-scale deforestation.
What a sorry way to run a state energy policy: Give to the have-nots what the haves don't want.
This leaves it up to states like Massachusetts, which requires utilities to increase annually their use of renewable power sources, and California, which is pioneering a requirement that motor vehicles reduce their carbon emissions.
But Congress has not made significant progress in passing a bill to create a leasing system for sites similar to one that exists for offshore oil and gas drilling.
"There is good money in wind," said Rafael Bayo, an engineer and energy consultant.
The European Union, moreover, has been pushing for alternatives to fossil fuels as part of its commitment under the Kyoto treaty to reduce greenhouse gases, and it wants 22 percent of its electricity to come from renewable sources by 2010.
Many projects have been delayed because officials everywhere are demanding stringent environmental impact studies.
These are still under way for the Trafalgar wind fields, and it remains to be seen whether they will support the fishermen's position.
The area is on the flight path of tens of thousands of eagles, ducks, storks, swallows and many other birds crossing to winter in Africa.
Daniel Lopez Marijuan, of the association of Ecologists in Action said, "The first studies have shown that migrating birds do not fly very low here, unless a storm takes them off their course."
There are other stakeholders, including two nearby NATO bases, the operators of a gas duct that comes to Spain from North Africa and the heavy shipping traffic in and out of the Mediterranean, but planners say their studies show the windmills pose no obstruction.
If that is true, the fishermen along the Trafalgar coast may be alone in confronting the powerful lobby of wind producers.
"That is why many hilltops now have windmills.
Companies, including utilities, have staked out tracts in the seas off Britain, Denmark, Germany, Ireland and the Netherlands.
A farmer used to get nothing from his hill, now he rents it to a utility or puts his own windmills there."
This may continue, he believes, as long as the government pays grid operators the difference between conventional and wind generated electricity, on average two or three cents per kilowatt-hour.
Eventually, some experts think, wind power may become competitive as turbines get bigger and as pollution taxes are imposed on fossil fuel energy, as planned.
Manuel Bustos, who represents the association of wind producers, said his group would try to convince the fishermen that they may benefit from the offshore project.
He said that in European pilot projects, fish farms have been attached to sea-based windmills.
In another experiment, the underwater base of the mill was used to create artificial reefs to act as fish nurseries.
At Barbate, the fishermen said they had never heard of this.
The incentive is evident, Millais said, because Europe's oil and natural gas reserves are running out and energy imports, now at 50 percent, will rise further.
Wind farms based at sea today still have a modest capacity of 600 megawatts, but this is expected to grow more than tenfold by 2010, said Corin Millais, director of the European Wind Energy Association.
"There are dozens of projects waiting for licenses, on land and offshore," Bustos said.
The seabed off Cape Trafalgar, one of six marine sites being studied, is a favorite.
Spain is already one of Europe's largest producers of wind power, second only to Germany, and its present capacity of 8,500 megawatts can supply close to 5 percent of the country's electricity.
Indications are that this may double by 2010.
In this country, where almost all oil, gas and coal must be imported, the wind rush has been under way for more than a decade.
Privately owned "wind parks," encouraged by official subsidies, first sprouted on the hills near here, behind Trafalgar and Tarifa.
The gleaming white towers then spread to the rest of the country, to the windswept north and the central highlands.
Like the old stone windmills that have dotted Spanish horizons for centuries, the modern turbines are all on land.
But now Spanish entrepreneurs want to join Europe's booming new trend of building large wind farms offshore.
There are no important tourist resorts nearby, although visitors often come here from Britain, where "Trafalgar" has a special ring.
But specialists say the rush is on now for offshore wind energy, and northern Europe is leading the way.
Binoculars in hand, people climb to the tip of the cape, a knobby dune with a lighthouse on top.
Here they peer out at the water where 60 British, French and Spanish warships clashed in 1805 in the battle that established Britain's naval supremacy for the next century.
Cesar del Campo, director of a consortium involved in the wind park plans, said the site is difficult because of the water depth and the speed of the currents, but that the energy yield would be high.
"You have to see the Strait of Gibraltar like a huge fast-moving river that changes with the tides," he said.
"Some days there may be heavy gusts from Atlantic storms, but you can count on wind every day."
The building cost can be twice as high as on land, though, offsetting the larger yield.
It means driving piles into the sea floor, laying cables to the shore and doing riskier maintenance work.
Should the Trafalgar plans fail, then offshore parks may go elsewhere, given the Spaniards' hunger for wind profits.
"Enough to produce another 50,000 megawatts."
The lack of such a framework is no reason to stall the Cape Wind project, which is now a step closer to becoming a model for offshore wind power generation.
They may not be optimal for the developer from a profit-making point of view, but we need to balance the public and private interest.
Ernie Corrigan, a spokesman for the alliance, said, "This is not a political issue at all."
Opposition is "a matter of common sense."
Asked if the Egan family involvement influenced Romney's position regarding Cape Wind, Romney aide Eric Fehrnstrom replied via e-mail: "No, not at all."
Asked to explain Romney's shifting positions, Fehrnstrom, said, again via e-mail: "Gov.
Romney supports efforts to encourage greater reliance on renewable sources of energy.
There are several areas in the Berkshires region where wind farms have recently been approved.
And there are a number of different areas off the coast of Massachusetts that we could also consider.
Nantucket Sound is a national treasure.
It concluded that lower property values, reduced tourism revenue, and a loss in year-round jobs would result from the wind farm.
The governor does not want to turn it into a wind factory.
He wouldn't recommend putting a wind farm in the middle of the Grand Canyon, or at the foot of Mount Rushmore, either.
In the Berkshires, legal challenges are underway.
Under the current plan, "a year from now, turbine number 16 will be the third highest point in Massachusetts," says Eleanor Tillinghast, co-founder of Green Berkshires, Inc., a group formed to oppose wind farm power.
"We believe the aesthetics are equally as valuable here.
Nantucket Sound is a national treasure, so are the mountains of western Massachusetts."
But, she says, western Massachusetts is being left to the mercies of the free market system, where small towns suffering from budget cutbacks are "willing to sell their wind, because what else do they have to sell?"
The Egan Family Trust owns property in Cotuit overlooking Nantucket Sound, and Michael Egan owns a home on Great Island, off Yarmouth, overlooking Nantucket Sound.
The Egan Family Foundation was the main funding source for a $100,000 survey done by the Beacon Hill Institute.
Ugliness can be good for you -- especially if you are not rich, powerful, or politically connected.
The structures would stretch 417 feet high from the water's surface to the tallest blade tip and would be visible 4 miles away on Cape Cod and more distantly from Martha's Vineyard and Nantucket.
After a massive draft environmental analysis, the controversial proposal to construct a wind farm in Nantucket Sound is coming down to aesthetics.
Massachusetts Governor Mitt Romney -- a supposedly pro-business, anti-government-regulation, cold-blooded venture capitalist -- made that clear during recent testimony before the US Army Corps of Engineers.
"We cannot trash this extraordinary resource," Romney said, referring to Nantucket Sound. "
I've seen wind farms, and they are not pretty."
Two days later, the Romney administration announced support for windmill projects in Florida and Monroe in western Massachusetts.
Residents there also worry about the aesthetics of 20 340-foot tall turbines and the overall impact on streams, wetlands, and woodland.
And that raises a question: With government under pressure to develop renewable energy, will controversial alternatives be foisted solely on poorer, less politically influential areas?
Some environmental groups, including the Conservation Law Foundation and Greenpeace believe the trade-off in terms of energy and pollution savings is worth it.
Here, while they also contribute to Democrats, they are big Romney fund-raisers.
But Cape Wind Associates, the developer behind the proposal, is fighting the wealthy and well-connected, including Senator Edward M. Kennedy and other Kennedy kin along with some average Cape residents.
As for Romney's loud opposition, the governor could be feeling pressure from Attorney General Thomas F. Reilly's strong effort to challenge the project.
Or, perhaps he is feeling another type of pressure?
On forms filed with the IRS in 2003, Christopher, Jack, and Michael Egan are listed as directors.
Jack and Michael Egan are current board members.
They are sons of Richard Egan, founder and chairman emeritus of EMC Corp.
The Egans are major political players.
The windmill projects are part of a drive by Spain to expand its output of native renewable energy.
Their protests may well fall on deaf ears.
"We talk and talk, and we ask," said Antonio Varo, another angry fisherman.
The report is preliminary, and the public will have at least until Jan. 10 to comment on its findings, said Karen Adams, who supervises the permit process for the Corps of Engineers.
Mark Rodgers, a spokesman for Cape Wind, said the company must still raise the capital needed to build the project.
But if all goes well, he said, the plant could be producing power as early as 2007.
The power would go into the regional grid, not precisely to Cape Cod and the islands, he said.
But on a day with average wind, it would produce about 420 megawatts -- three-fourths of average electricity needs for the local area.
"Many of the more hysterical fears that opponents had been speaking of in the past three years were not supported in this analysis," Rodgers said of the impact statement.
As is required, Cape Wind paid for the work that went into the report.
"As a predictable result," the alliance said in a statement, "the document is strongly biased toward Cape Wind."
Adams and the project's supporters dismiss that criticism.
The corps requires applicants to pay for studies of their proposals, she said, because it would not be right for taxpayers to pay for them.
The corps independently chose the experts who produced each section of the report, she said, and Cape Wind willingly financed whatever the work the corps requested.
She added, however, that some in the corps did not expect to find themselves in the position of issuing federal permits for the project.
"We had to do a lot of learning real quick," she said.
But some officials -- including Gov.
Mitt Romney, Sen. Edward M. Kennedy and Rep. Bill Delahunt, whose congressional district includes the project site, say the project should not go forward yet.
They say the towers, to be based some 10 miles offshore, will force their small vessels to make large detours in the already treacherous waters near the Strait of Gibraltar.
A final environmental review may be completed as soon as a year from now, she said.
And while opponents predict that the field of towers would drive away tourists, the corps said the project might actually attract sightseers.
Advocates of the wind farm say establishing such a process would only mean unnecessary delay.
Birds will fly into the towers and die, the statement says, but probably at a rate of only about one a day, not enough "to cause bird population declines."
Using current technology, it is more practical to build offshore turbines fairly close to land, which means they can be visible in nearby communities.
The environmental report, prepared by the Army Corps of Engineers, includes a "visual impact assessment" by an architectural historian who states that the turbines "will have an adverse visual effect" on historic properties and locations in the area.
That may not be pleasant for some residents, but the supposed harm to a view is more than offset by the beneficial impact of the clean Cape Wind power.
Nantucket Sound lies between Cape Cod, Nantucket Island and Martha's Vineyard, some of the nation's best-known vacation spots.
Now a private company is proposing to build the world's largest offshore wind power plant right in the middle of it.
Depending on who is talking, the results would be either a hideous blot on the landscape or a significant step toward clean power and energy independence.
But instead of helping to settle the question, the report fed the debate over building there and where -- or whether -- other wind farms should be built in the nation's coastal waters.
The 4,000-page draft gives new support to environmental groups that praise the project as a safe, nonpolluting and desperately needed alternative to fossil fuel power plants.
But opponents challenge the report, the process that produced it and the idea of building the turbine array in the first place.
Regardless of its environmental impact, they say, it is just too ugly -- an industrial development that would wreck pristine vistas in a major tourism area.
Many add that no offshore energy projects should be considered until the government establishes a better review process for proposals to use federal lands offshore.
A similar proposal is under consideration off Jones Beach, on Long Island, and officials in New Jersey are looking into offshore wind power.
The Corps of Engineers' draft concluded that the project, proposed by Cape Wind Associates of Boston, would not unduly hinder ferry operations, commercial and sport fishing, boating, aviation or other activities at its site, a 24-square-mile area in the part of Nantucket Sound called Horseshoe Shoals.
It said the project's 130 support towers, turbines and blades, which together would rise about 420 feet above the water, would not seriously affect currents, waves, water quality, sand movement, fishing conditions or noise levels.
Adequate steps can be taken to protect marine mammals and shellfish, the report said.
(Sen. John Kerry says he will await the final environmental impact statement before taking a position.)
They say offshore projects of all kinds need a more systematic federal review process.
And several environmental organizations have found themselves in the unaccustomed position of praising the Corps of Engineers, which many have criticized in the past as being too quick to approve development projects.
"The United States," he said, "is way behind in the clean energy race."
"At first, obviously, it was pretty frightening because of their history," said Kert Davies, U.S. research director for Greenpeace, which favors the project.
Similar considerations are prompting interest in offshore wind power on Long Island and in New Jersey, several experts said.
"It's difficult to site a large wind development in the Northeast," Swisher said.
Advocates of wind power cite Denmark as an example, saying the country generates 20 percent or more of its energy from wind, and Davies of Greenpeace says the record there suggests that offshore wind farms can become tourism destinations.
"In Denmark, day sailors take off and sail to these things," he said.
He and others at environmental groups said they hoped the Cape Wind proposal would win final approval and would become the first of many offshore wind projects.
Near this blustery headland where Admiral Nelson won his great naval victory over the French two centuries ago, a new battle of Trafalgar is brewing.
Rodgers said the site offered several important advantages.
But the ships involved today are only small fishing boats, wanting to protect their livelihood.
Two companies plan to build large clusters of windmills in the sea just off this stretch of Spain's southern shore, a gritty place of sand dunes, lagoons and sharp brown reefs.
With about 400 offshore turbines, they want to capture the power of the winds that blow almost constantly here, at the cusp of two seas, the Atlantic and the Mediterranean.
Fishermen respond that these phalanxes of giant towers near the coast will make their tough jobs even more difficult.
"This is where the tuna pass and this is where we work," said Manuel Ponce Alva, leader of fishermen's protest movement, waving a marine map covered with ominous red arrows.
The men from the fishing villages of Barbate, Vejer and Conil have knocked on many official doors to argue that these wind farms will disturb the migration of the young tuna and, more dramatically, that their own lives may be at stake.
It is in the middle of an area whose population -- and electricity demands -- are growing.
And it is a short distance to Barnstable, where power generated by the windmills can feed into the national grid.
Still, he said, should the federal government decide to require lease payments, the company would "absolutely" pay.
Besides, advocates say, a diminished view is a small price to pay for clean power.
But he added, "I think the effort was very solid, and they were under a lot of scrutiny."
Davies also dismissed as "an elitist and local view" assertions that the wind turbine array would spoil a pristine environment.
Nantucket Sound is far from that, he said, filled as it is with "mega boat traffic and jet skis and fishing boats and ferries -- it is not the Grand Canyon these guys are painting it to be."
Others say that regulatory issues aside, the aesthetics are perhaps the biggest issue standing in the project's way.
"It's a legitimate concern," said Bruce Bailey of AWS Truewind, a research firm in Albany, N.Y., that consulted on the Cape Wind project.
But, he said, "It's based on expectations, not based on what people have actually seen."
He said photo simulations of what the wind farm will look like from shore -- it will be 4.7 miles away at its closest point -- assume the clearest of weather conditions.
And Rodgers, the Cape Wind spokesman, said that "non-extractive" users of coastal lands -- companies that run telecommunications cables and the like -- are not required to pay for the privilege.
Often, he said, the distant view from shore is obscured by haze, so the turbines would not be so obvious.
"If we are not willing to accept that tradeoff, I think it says something pretty profound about our priorities and our commitment to moving to cleaner sources of electricity," said Randy Swisher, executive director of the American Wind Energy Association, which represents developers, suppliers, consultants and others in the wind power industry.
The corps' statement did not address in detail another criticism opponents have voiced: that the project is economically viable only because of tax credits or because the federal government is giving the company free use of the site, issues that some say should be considered in a broader federal review of development of offshore lands.
But advocates contend that all kinds of fossil fuel energy projects benefit from federal incentives.
Colorado utilities will have to sell a lot more electricity from wind power in years to come under a statewide ballot initiative approved by voters on Nov. 2, and if they want some pointers they might talk to Adam T. Kremers, a 19-year-old sophomore at Colorado State University here.
The Alliance to Protect Nantucket Sound, a group founded to block the project, said Monday that it intends to ask the government to extend the comment period to six months, saying that two months is too little time for the public to digest the enormous amount of information in the Army Corps report.
The project would be the nation's first offshore wind power plant, and it is being closely watched up and down the Eastern Seaboard.
The argument over the proposal intensified last week, when the Army Corps of Engineers issued a draft environmental impact statement finding few flaws in the proposal.
The new draft environmental impact report, prepared over three years by the Army Corps of Engineers, will be released in full Tuesday, but supporters and opponents responded to details that became public Monday morning.
The Nantucket Sound wind farm, proposed by Cape Wind Associates, would be the country's first offshore wind farm.
``This project has undergone extensive environmental review, and the public has a right to learn what the implications of it will be,'' said Philip Warburg, president of the Conservation Law Foundation.
It is warming more than the rest of the planet, according to the report by the eight-nation Arctic Council, which includes the United States.
Opposition to Cape Wind is organized through the Alliance to Protect Nantucket Sound, which spent $2.4 million fighting the proposed wind farm in 2003.