Black smoke rose from the chimney of the Sistine Chapel Monday evening as cardinals of the Roman Catholic Church signaled that they had voted inconclusively in their first attempt to elect a successor to Pope John Paul II.
Text of the oath taken by the 115 cardinals voting in the conclave to elect a new pope.
Led by Ratzinger, the cardinals pledged ``secrecy regarding everything that in any way relates to the election of the Roman Pontiff and regarding what occurs in the place of the election....'' They swore ``not to break this secret in any way, either during or after the election of the new Pontiff, unless explicit authorization is granted by the same Pontiff,'' and they promised to resist any intervention by ``secular authorities'' or anyone else in the election of the pope.
According to rules put in place by John Paul II in 1996, the 115 cardinals eligible to vote may have one ballot on the first day of the conclave, as the sequestered gatherings are known.
But attention in Vatican City is focused on one cardinal who is sure to influence the selection, Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger of Germany, as well as about two dozen others who are considered "papabile," or qualified to become the 265th leader of the Catholic Church, which has 1 billion members.
In a particular way, we promise and swear to observe with the greatest fidelity and with all persons, clerical or lay, secrecy regarding everything that in any way relates to the election of the Roman Pontiff and regarding what occurs in the place of the election, directly or indirectly related to the results of the voting; we promise and swear not to break this secret in any way, either during or after the election of the new Pontiff, unless explicit authorization is granted by the same Pontiff; and never to lend support or favour to any interference, opposition or any other form of intervention, whereby secular authorities of whatever order and degree or any group of people or individuals might wish to intervene in the election of the Roman Pontiff."
Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger _ a powerful Vatican official from Germany who often has been mentioned as a leading candidate for pope _ recited a prayer at the palace before the cardinals chanted the Litany of the Saints as they made the short walk to the chapel.
Ratzinger, who was the prefect of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith during the John Paul II papacy, is admired by many for his defense of orthodoxy, but is also controversial for approving the disciplining of numerous theologians.
Ratzinger and several Italian cardinals are among the potential kingmakers at the conclave, viewed by many analysts as able to influence the selection of the next pope, even if they themselves are not likely to be elected.
The black smoke signaled that no man had received two-thirds of the vote from the 115 cardinals sequestered in the chapel.
Cardinals from six continents made their solemn procession to the Sistine Chapel on Monday to convene the new millennium's first conclave _ a secret and sacred gathering to elect a pope who will guide the world's 1.1 billion Roman Catholics into a new era.
Cardinals from around the globe began their secret conclave to elect a new pope Monday, filing into the Sistine Chapel in a solemn procession hours after the putative front-runner to succeed Pope John Paul II, Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger, inveighed against ideological fashions and urged his fellow cardinals to hold fast to church doctrine.
Thousands of pilgrims and tourists were expected to converge on St. Peter's Square to watch the chapel chimney for the white smoke that ultimately will tell the world that the church's 265th pontiff has been elected.
Now with its papal benefactor gone, Opus Dei's influence under the next pope -- and its role in choosing the new pontiff -- have become hot topics in a city awash in speculation as the world's cardinals meet behind the closed doors of the Sistine Chapel to elect John Paul's successor.
Cardinals from around the globe began their secret conclave to elect a new pope Monday and later cast their first ballots, failing to reach agreement on a successor to Pope John Paul II.
The first vote came more than two hours after the cardinals had locked themselves inside the Sistine Chapel following a solemn oath-taking in which they pledged to maintain the conclave's traditional secrecy.
They plan to gather at 10 a.m. (4 a.m. EDT) Monday in St. Peter's Basilica for a "Mass for the election of the Supreme Pontiff."
The dean of the College of Cardinals, Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger, read the following in Latin:
For the next few days, the world's attention will be focused on the chapel roof, watching for the white smoke that indicates a successful election.
But Masuoka also said he would like the cardinals to make another bold geographic choice, as they did with John Paul II, who, as a Pole, was the first non-Italian pope in 455 years.
Tourists and journalists Sunday trained their eyes and their cameras on the T-shaped chimney above the Sistine Chapel, where, sooner or later, white smoke will signal the election of a pope.
For a few moments, the first wisps of smoke looked white to the many spectators drawn to St. Peter's Square in the Vatican and hopes rose that a pope had already been chosen.
On a cold, rainy Sunday afternoon, the red-robed princes of the church made their way into the Vatican compound where they will stay until they elect a new pope.
If they decide to hold off a day, they will hold four rounds of voting _ two in the morning, two in the afternoon _ on Tuesday and every day until a candidate gets two-thirds support: 77 votes.
"We're sitting in the square, waiting for the smoke to come from the chimney," he reported.
In an interview before the pope's death, Herranz, one of the Opus Dei cardinals, was asked whether an Opus Dei member could become pope, given that its reputation is negative in some quarters.
Earlier Monday, the cardinals retreated behind the heavy wooden doors of the Sistine Chapel and began the tradition-laden and secret ceremonies to elect one of their number the 265th pope.
The cardinals will choose whether or not to cast a first ballot Monday afternoon; after Monday, they are scheduled to vote twice each morning and twice each afternoon until they elect a pope.
In a historic gathering steeped in intrigue, cardinals from six continents on Monday open their first conclave of the new millennium to elect a pope who will inherit John Paul II's mantle and guide the world's 1.1 billion Roman Catholics into a new era.
Several others among them -- two thirds of the cardinals voting for pope are septuagenarians -- appeared to doze.
Although the conclave could last for days, a pope could be chosen as early as Monday afternoon if the red-capped prelates opt to begin casting ballots after their solemn procession from the Vatican's Apostolic Palace to the chapel.
Cardinals of the Roman Catholic Church convene in the Sistine Chapel this afternoon for a session that could produce the first ballot for a successor to Pope John Paul II, although such swift resolution seems unlikely.
Many Vatican watchers believe there is no cardinal who currently enjoys the support of 77 cardinals, the two-thirds' majority traditionally required for the election of a pope.
The cardinal described by some as the most likely alternative to Ratzinger in the initial voting is Carlo Maria Martini, also 78, the retired archbishop of Milan.
VATICAN CITY - On the central balcony of St. Peter's Basilica, where the next pope will be introduced to the world, a red curtain now hangs open, as if waiting for a cardinal to arrive and pronounce the news in Latin: "Habemus Papam."
Thousands of pilgrims began their stakeout in St. Peter's Square early Monday, and as the sun sank in the sky the square began to fill.
After taking their seats behind long tables, the cardinals were read an oath of secrecy and obedience by their dean, Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger.
At that point, the cardinals were to decide whether to hold a first round of voting Monday night or not.
Others note that, for the first time, two of the 115 voting cardinals -- Julian Herranz of Spain and Juan Luis Cipriani Thorne of Lima, Peru, -- are members of Opus Dei, giving the group the ability to work inside the conclave.
If no cardinal wins a two-thirds majority, 77 votes, after the third day, the cardinals will pause for a day for prayer and discussion, as John Paul ordered.
The cardinals are to vote again at their conclave on Tuesday.
From there, they will go to the Sistine Chapel twice daily -- unless the first ballot provides a two-thirds majority for a candidate.
Several European cardinals are known to be sympathetic to Opus Dei, among them Cardinal Camillo Ruini, the Italian prelate who runs the Diocese of Rome on behalf of the pope, and a contender to succeed John Paul.
Among them are Cardinal Carlo Maria Martini, the former archbishop of Milan, who is highly regarded by moderates but is considered unlikely to become pope because he is 78 and has Parkinson's disease, and Cardinal Camillo Ruini, the vicar general for Rome and the longtime president of the Italian bishops' conference.
At the church of San Andrea delle Fratte, Cardinal Ennio Antonelli, the archbishop of Florence, said: ``The new pope has already been chosen by the Lord.
If the conclaves of the last century are any guide, a pope should be elected by the end of the week.
"The new pope has already been chosen by the Lord.
But recently, several Italian newspapers breathlessly reported that the two Opus Dei cardinals were throwing their support behind the candidacy of Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger, a German-born traditionalist who has served as chief enforcer of church doctrine for two decades.
``They would not have grown so quickly and have gained the influence they have were it not for John Paul,'' he said.
The entire pageant was televised live, a first in conclave history and in keeping with the tradition of John Paul II, who used television throughout his papacy to promote the faith.
His homily at the traditional Mass for the election of a pope amounted to a campaign speech for orthodoxy, continuity with John Paul's papacy and staunch resistance to cultural pressure for change in the 1.1 billion-member Roman Catholic Church.
Raymond J. de Souza, chaplain at Newman House at Queens University in Kingston, Ontario, said that Ratzinger's homily was an "exhortation" to the cardinals to go into the conclave keeping in mind that the primary responsibility of a pope is to preserve the faith passed on from the apostles and not to dilute or experiment with it.
Shortly after 8 p.m. local time (2 p.m. EDT), black smoke emerged from a metal chimney atop the tile roof of the Sistine Chapel -- the traditional signal that the cardinals have voted but that no new pope has been elected.
White smoke would have meant the world had a new pope.
Wearing crimson robes and caps, the leaders of the Roman Catholic Church swore collective and individual oaths of secrecy before taking their places to begin the conclave in the chapel beneath the renowned frescoes of Michelangelo.
We just have to pray to understand who he is."
We just have to pray to understand who he is.''
The name with the biggest buzz was Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger, a powerful Vatican official from Germany who was to recite an opening prayer in Latin that the voters be guided "in our hearts in love and in patience."
We just have to pray to understand who he is," Florence Cardinal Ennio Antonelli, considered by some to be a dark-horse candidate, told believers who gathered for Sunday Mass at his titular church in Rome.
Among the long-shot possibilities are Cardinal Ivan Dias of Bombay, a longtime Vatican diplomat; Cardinal Marc Ouellet of Quebec, a crusader against same-sex marriage in Canada; and Cardinal Ennio Antonelli, the archbishop of Florence, who Sunday said in a homily: "The new pope has already been chosen by the Lord.
If you have a pope who is favorable to you, that's terrific.
John Wauck, a professor at the Pontifical University of the Holy Cross, an Opus Dei institution in Rome.
``Opus Dei has no candidate,'' Wauck said.
Speculation continues to focus on German Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger who, as dean of the college of cardinals, will lead today's Mass.
The cardinal has emerged as a front-runner in the election for the next pope, or at least the reference point for a bloc of support generally oriented toward a more conservative position.
Several Italian cardinals are also among the most discussed candidates for the papacy.
Then, at 4:30 p.m. (10:30 a.m. EDT), the cardinals are scheduled to gather in the Vatican palace and process into the Sistine Chapel, where they are to swear an oath, pledging secrecy, and to hear a meditation delivered by a retired cardinal, Tomas Spidlik.
"We wanted so much for it to be white."
Ratzinger, a respected theologian known as a polarizing church figure while head of the Vatican's Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, is 78.
The cardinals arrived by foot and by car Sunday at the Domus Sanctae Marthae, the Vatican guesthouse where they will sleep and eat during the conclave.
Indeed, John Paul II was a surprise choice to many when he was elected in 1978.
Ratzinger, who will be a powerful force in the conclave, took the occasion of a morning Mass dedicated to the election to denounce anyone who would stray from traditional Catholic doctrine.
Two-thirds, or 77 votes, are needed for election in the early rounds of voting.
We likewise promise, pledge and swear that whichever of us by divine disposition is elected Roman Pontiff will commit himself faithfully to carrying out the munus Petrinum of Pastor of the Universal Church and will not fail to affirm and defend strenuously the spiritual and temporal rights and the liberty of the Holy See.
The last conclave in 1978 took eight ballots over three days to choose John Paul.
But many Vatican watchers are focused on the possibility of a Latin American pope, because about half of the world's Catholics live in that region.
They were to take an oath of secrecy and hear a meditation before deciding whether to take their first vote or wait until Tuesday.
The prelates agreed after John Paul's funeral not to talk publicly about the process, but the world's news media have been rife with speculation centering on about two dozen candidates considered "papabile," Italian for pope material.
For 25 years, Ratzinger served as John Paul's theological right hand -- and watchdog -- as prefect of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith.
``They have a chance to lobby the other cardinals from an inside position,'' said an official with a lay organization with close ties to the Vatican.
"We, the cardinal electors present in this election of the Supreme Pontiff promise, pledge and swear, as individuals and as a group, to observe faithfully and scrupulously the prescriptions contained in the Apostolic Constitution of the Supreme Pontiff John Paul II, Universi Dominici Gregis, published on 22 February 1996.
Some analysts believe that to recognize the importance of its Latin American flock, the church will need to name the first pope from the other side of the Atlantic.
The famous stove in the chapel also will bellow black smoke to signal any inconclusive round of voting.
But if the cardinals remain deadlocked for more than 12 days, they can change the rules and elect the pontiff by a simple majority -- an innovation introduced by John Paul that has never been tried before.
Many of those in the square said they were praying for God to help the cardinals choose their new leader.
The smoke momentarily appeared white -- the sign that a pope has been chosen -- and a crowd in St. Peter's Square burst into applause.
No conclave in the past century has lasted more than five days, and the election that made John Paul II pope in October 1978 took eight ballots over three days.
``I thought it was Ratzinger saying, in effect, what you see is what you get,'' the Rev.
Opus Dei spokesman Brian Finnerty said that, during those decades, Opus Dei included both backers and opponents of Franco.
``From the pope's vantage point, what's not to like?''
And we have a saint now, our founder Escriva, so more people understand the good works and spiritual doctrine of Opus Dei.''
In 1982, he took the unprecedented step of making Opus Dei a personal prelature of the church, answerable not to local bishops in the dioceses where it operated, but to the pope alone through the Sacred Congregation of Bishops at the Holy See.
Among the issues sure to figure prominently in the conclave: containing the priest sex-abuse scandals that have cost the church millions in settlements in the United States; coping with a chronic shortage of priests and nuns in the West; halting the stream of people leaving a church whose teachings they no longer find relevant; and improving dialogue with the Islamic world.
Representing 52 countries, the 115 crimson-robed "princes" of a church stung by priest sex-abuse scandals and an exodus of the faithful were to celebrate a midmorning Mass at St. Peter's Basilica before sequestering themselves in the Sistine Chapel at 4:30 p.m. (1430 GMT).
Clad in crimson vestments and caps, the 115 voting "princes" of a church stung by priest sex-abuse scandals and an exodus of the faithful walked slowly from the Apostolic Palace to sequester themselves inside the chapel decorated with frescoes by Michelangelo.
Cardinal Salvatore Pappalardo, an Italian who at 86 is too old to vote, told Italian state radio Sunday he was confident the conclave would be guided to the right man.
Many of the pilgrims said they would come to the square every day until a cardinal cries from a Vatican balcony "Habemus papam" _ "We have a pope" _ however long it takes.
By 8 p.m. (1800 GMT) there was a lopsided crowd of tens of thousands, grouped on the south side of the square from which the chimney is visible.
He died April 2 at 84 after a pontificate that lasted more than 26 years, history's third-longest papacy.
The pope had come to pay his respects to Bishop Alvaro del Portillo, the prelate of Opus Dei, who had died that day.
It was the last public rite before the conclave.
But within seconds, jubilation gave way to resignation when the chimney began belching decidedly black smoke.
The penalty is severe -- excommunication.
He also spoke out against ``godless'' communism.
Paz Angelica Casillas, a honeymooner from Mexico, stopped jumping up and down and released her new husband from an embrace.
"Words cannot describe this place."
Escriva hewed to the theologically conservative stances shared by John Paul, including strict adherence to the church's teaching on sexual and moral issues.
``It was vintage Ratzinger -- calm, deliberate, precise, incisive.''
Tears streamed down the faces of Leila Mota and Mariana Dias as they embraced tightly.
Rwandan nuns in blue habits, Filipino monks in gray robes and tourists in T-shirts mixed together, shaking hands and hugging in the sign of peace.
"This is history," said Hernan Aracena, 19, wrapped in a Venezuelan flag.
Firefighter Lance Smaw dialed home to Mesa, Arizona, to tell his wife Colleen that he was in place.
A Colombian priest grabbed two strangers in a bear hug, screaming, "It's a pope!"
Smaw, 35, flew into Rome with three friends Monday morning, leaving Colleen to take care of the kids.
The cardinals were led by altar servers carrying two long, lit white candles and a metal crucifix.
A gasp of disbelief spread quickly through the crowd.
"His ideology is a medieval, anti-Reformation, anti-modern paradigm of the church and the papacy," he said.
They also are forbidden from watching television, listening to radio or reading newspapers and magazines.
Such a turn would come around May 1.
The idea was strongly expressed in a document the congregation issued in 2000, Dominus Iesus, which provoked angry responses from other religious leaders.
In his writings and public statements, Ratzinger has often sought to uphold the primacy of Catholicism, saying no other religion offered a path to salvation.
He also decried the creation of "sects" and how people are seduced into them, using a term church leaders often employ to refer to Protestant evangelical movements.
Ratzinger, 78, spoke Italian in heavily accented German, his voice creaky at times and interrupted by coughs.
Several church officials said he had been suffering from a cold.
Yet papal elections have been famously unpredictable, with unexpected winners and presumed front-runners often facing surprising fates.
Voting resumes for seven ballots, followed by another pause; then seven more and another pause; then seven more.
But there were different interpretations of his intent.
cried Piero Marini, the master of papal liturgical ceremonies -- or "Everyone out!"
Roger Haight, formerly of the Weston Jesuit School of Theology in Cambridge, because Ratzinger deemed a book Haight wrote as containing "serious doctrinal errors" about the role of Jesus in the salvation for non-Christians.
Ratzinger recently approved a teaching ban against the Rev.
Michael Paulson can be reached at mpaulsonglobe.com.
At the Mass Monday, "he's giving evidence that he also has, if you will, the 'vision thing,' that he has definite ideas of where the natural progression of John Paul's theological legacy is," Pham said.
He said he thought the interest was due in no small part to ``The Da Vinci Code,'' whose depiction of Opus Dei is disputed by the group as inaccurate and misleading.
And you have Opus Dei members adhering to the magisterium (official church teachings) as strictly as possible.''
After the oath-taking, television camera operators who were recording the scene live and all others were ordered out of the chapel, and its wooden doors were closed.
"I think it's going to be a fairly challenging conclave - there's never been a leading candidate, and the reason is that there are a whole number of opinions, and so much depends on what the cardinals find to be the major issue facing the church," said the Rev.
``Opus Dei has become a victim of Christian-phobia,'' Herranz said.
Cardinal Dionigi Tettamanzi of Milan has emerged as a favorite of moderates, despite his ties to the conservative group Opus Dei, because of his interest in social justice, while Cardinal Angelo Scola of Venice, the son of a truck driver who became an accomplished theologian, is liked by conservatives.
To alter Opus Dei's status, a new pope would have to change the canon law, and not even liberals in the church expect that to happen.
``Obviously they're all sitting there thinking, what would this man be like as pope?''
``To have a clear faith according to the church's creed is often labeled fundamentalism, while relativism -- letting ourselves be carried away by any wind of doctrine -- is made to appear the only attitude acceptable in today's times,'' he said.
For the first time ever, cardinals will be allowed to move about Vatican City freely once the voting starts, though they are forbidden to talk to anyone who hasn't been sworn to secrecy.
There, seated atop a false floor hiding electronic jamming devices designed to thwart eavesdroppers, they were to take an oath of secrecy, hear a meditation from a senior cardinal and decide whether to take a first vote or wait until Tuesday.
The elaborately detailed rules for election of a supreme pontiff for the 1.1- billion member church are based on rituals going back centuries.
``How many winds of doctrine have we known?''
Already forbidden to speak to reporters, they were to take a vow of complete secrecy upon entering the Sistine Chapel on Monday.
"John Paul II was very good for all religions, and we hope that whoever will replace him will do the same," said Mohammed Salem, 49, of Mauritania, a Muslim tourist who praised John Paul II's outreach to Islam.
And the 115 cardinal-electors - those under age 80 - Sunday left apartments and hotels and seminaries around Rome and moved into the Domus Sanctae Marthae, the $20 million residence where they will stay while participating in the conclave that begins Monday.
Each of the cardinal electors, according to the order of precedence, then took the oath:
He was the first non-Italian pope in 455 years, and many analysts say the Italians are desperate to reclaim the papacy.
Cardinals traditionally have used their first vote to honor mentors and admired leaders, according to John Allen, author of "Conclave," a book about the process of electing a pope.
"Not many people have the chance to do something like this."
A total of 117 cardinals under age 80 are eligible to vote, but two are ill, bringing the expected number of electors to 115.
During a sermon at the church of San Giovanni della Pigna, Arinze told the congregation that the next pope ``should be a preacher'' and ``a shepherd who sacrifices himself for the people of God.''
And the cardinals have much to ponder after the third-longest papacy in history.
Cardinals could select him as a "caretaker pope" who would presumably serve a shorter reign than the 26 years John Paul served.
At some point soon after the new pope is chosen, the Vatican also will ring bells.
Sister Monica, a 27-year-old Carmelite nun from Ragusa, Italy, said she was confident they would make a wise choice.
"This is the first conclave of the new millennium," said Sister Jolanta, a 29-year-old Polish nun.
"The emotion is so strong, the faith is so great."
"It is a very strong burden, choosing the pope who will guide the church."
Hours before the conclave, Ratzinger delivered a blunt sermon at St. Peter's Basilica.
"It will be He who will decide it all."
The message is that John Paul's goals must be maintained, he said.
He has pledged the group's loyalty to whomever the cardinals elect.
Keith Pecklers, professor of theology at the Pontifical Gregorian University in Rome.
"They have to make the choice based on the needs of the church and the needs of the wider society."
As for the future, Opus Dei officials say they are not worried.
Alberto Monticone, a professor of modern history at Lumsa Catholic University in Rome, called the comments "a very clear indication of what in his view the attitude of the next pope should be -- an attitude of struggle against these evils of the world."
"Now what we are all hoping for is that the Lord illuminates the cardinals ... that the Lord through them makes the decision," said Rev.
``Opus Dei has international connections, they know many cardinals, are appreciated by some.
Opus Dei, or ``Work of God,'' was founded in Spain in 1928.
A Mass at 10 a.m. today will be their last official public appearance until they have a new leader.
James Martin, a Jesuit and associate editor of his religious order's magazine, America, said it was undeniable that Opus Dei had a stake in the election of the new pope.
If they remain deadlocked late in the second week of voting, they can vote to change the rules so a winner can be elected with a simple majority: 58 votes.
"I would like them to choose someone who will continue where the old man has left off - not to favor any continent, but to be a universal person," said Stan Alfwani, a 34-year-old seminarian from Nairobi.
If there is still no pope, John Paul said, the cardinals may resort to a simple majority, or 58.
Among the most frequently mentioned are Cardinals Dionigi Tettamanzi of Milan, Angelo Scola of Venice, Camillo Ruini of Rome, Francis Arinze of Nigeria, Ivan Dias of India, Christoph Schoenborn of Austria, Claudio Hummes of Brazil, Jorge Mario Bergoglio of Argentina and Oscar Andres Rodriguez Maradiaga of Honduras.
``He came over to pray before the body of Don Alvaro, which is a very unusual thing to have a pope come over to your house to pray,'' said the Rev.
The cardinals drew lots last week for rooms in the $20 million "Domus Sanctae Marthae" (St. Martha's House), a hotel built by John Paul II and operated by the Daughters of Charity of St. Vincent DePaul.
Cardinal Claudio Hummes of Sao Paolo demonstrated his concern for labor by offering shelter to striking metalworkers; Jorge Mario Bergoglio of Buenos Aires is a Jesuit priest who prefers to travel by bus and refused to live in the local archbishop's mansion; and Cardinal Oscar Andres Rodriguez Maradiaga of Tegucigalpa, Honduras, is an advocate for the poor who drew critical attention when he blasted US newspapers, including The Boston Globe, for their coverage of the clergy sexual-abuse crisis.
But the world's 1.1 billion Roman Catholics were to spend another night without an earthly leader.
Tens of thousands of faithful had been standing on the cobblestones for hours Monday, all eyes fixed on the narrow stovepipe jutting from the Sistine Chapel, when a curl of smoke whisped into the chilly evening air.
Although the conclave can elect any baptized Catholic male as pope, that has rarely been done.
Sunday, crowds of tourists milled about a rainy St. Peter's Square, visiting the basilica, taking pictures of the chimney, and talking expectantly about the week ahead.
Soon, however, the smoke turned decisively black as it wafted from a stovepipe chimney, blowing in the winds at dusk.
The shortest -- a day -- elected Pius XII in 1939 (three ballots) and John Paul I in 1978 (three or four ballots).
Most conclaves in the past century have lasted only three or four days.
The longest conclave took 14 ballots, lasted five days and produced Pope Pius XI in 1922.
Their birettas, red hats that symbolize the power of their offices, sat on the tables in front of them.
(Some packed CDs and earphones, others put in snacks, according to the report.)
If you have a pope who does not see things the way Opus Dei does, that's more problematic.''
Earlier in the day, they heard another message.
Ratzinger has enjoyed a boomlet in support in part because many people thought he did a good job delivering the homily at John Paul II's funeral, and in part because he was a close adviser to the pontiff.
"As time goes by, this will be one of those moments where you say, `I was there.'"
Yasuhiko Masuoka, 67, of Tokyo said he, too, is hoping for a pope who will carry on John Paul II's policies.
As they entered the chapel, they filed past the Vatican's Swiss Guards in ceremonial uniforms.
Officially, Opus Dei has stressed that it is above the fray.
Representing 52 countries, the most diverse group in history, the cardinals say they believe the choice will be informed by the Holy Spirit.
But, he said, ``more people today love Opus Dei than don't.
Opus Dei officials have greeted the speculation about its role in choosing a new pope with a mixture of political realism and amusement.
"His performance at the funeral certainly solidified his reputation, and if he's not elected himself, I don't think anyone can be elected over his objections," said John-Peter Pham, a professor at James Madison University.
"I strongly believe that the Holy Spirit will be the 116th (elector), and the most important one," she said.
Earlier, the putative front-runner to succeed John Paul, Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger, inveighed against ideological fashions and urged his fellow cardinals to hold fast to church doctrine.
``Let us renew our desire to serve the pope, for it was only to serve the church that God wanted Opus Dei.''
On Sunday, some of the cardinals celebrated Mass at churches they are nominally assigned to in Rome.
Richard John Neuhaus, editor of the journal First Things, said of the German cardinal's homily.
Conspicuously missing from their quarters were cell phones, newspapers, radios, TVs and Internet connections _ all banned in new rules laid down by John Paul II to minimize the chances of news influencing their secret deliberations and to prevent leaks to the outside world.
``We already love with our whole soul the successor of John Paul II, whoever he may be,'' Echevarria wrote to the organization's members.
"She's taking one for the team," he said.
They are entitled to talk to cardinals, to invite them to dinner, all with authority.''
"Having a clear faith, according to the Credo of the Church, is often labeled as fundamentalism," he said.
Sobbing, she said she could feel John Paul's presence.
At the funeral, the cardinal showed his pastoral side, said John-Peter Pham, a former Vatican diplomat and author of a book about papal succession.
The cardinals, who stopped granting on-the-record interviews more than a week ago, have offered few indications as to whom they will choose to replace John Paul II, who died April 2 after a 26-year papacy.
"And I, (NAME), do so promise, pledge and swear."
Even in death, his image was broadcast as he lay in state inside St. Peter's Basilica.
In 2002, Escriva was canonized before a crowd of 300,000 in St. Peter's Square, becoming Saint Josemaria a mere 27 years after he died.
The cardinals in red robes and white miters formed a crescent in front of the altar, which rests atop the tomb of St. Peter and under a huge bronze canopy, or baldachin.
"This time they should choose a pope from Latin America, because it will show a more cosmopolitan image to the world," Masuoka said.
"Other things like war and peace and hunger are high on the agenda of other cardinals."
The 114 other cardinals sat in quarter-circles in front of him.
There, under Michelangelo's depiction of a stern Christ delivering the Last Judgment, they will mark their ballots at long tables covered with golden cloths.
Today it also provides a means of preserving secrecy in an age of new technology.
He has been a major force among the cardinals since John Paul's death on April 2, celebrating the funeral Mass and leading the cardinals' regular daily meetings.
"It's just a part of history and a part of a new tomorrow, a new start," he said.
Secondly, you have Opus Dei's affluent members donating money to the Vatican.
Professor Hans Kueng, a theologian at the University of Tubingen, who has tangled with Ratzinger, said he heard similar views many years ago from him.
Gerald O'Collins, a theologian at the Gregorian Pontifical University in Rome.
The cardinals have been under a self-imposed ban on interviews with the news media, but Italian newspapers have regularly reported how possible papal candidates are faring, what factions are forming and even, from the Turin newspaper "La Stampa," what the cardinals were packing in their suitcases.
Opus Dei flourished during John Paul's pontificate.
In solemn procession, walking slowly in pairs, they proceeded into the chapel as a choir chanted the Litany of Saints, passing between a pair of Swiss guards in full regalia.
Critics of Opus Dei have said the church's decision to make Escriva a saint was disturbing in view of his friendship with Spain's late fascist dictator, Francisco Franco.
Italian newspapers, without naming any sources in the College of Cardinals, have speculated that Ratzinger will enter the conclave Monday afternoon with about 50 votes.
Pilgrims trained their cell phone cameras at the chapel roof.
Then they lined up and one by one put their hand on the Gospel and swore to obey.
"Some of the cardinals would not agree with his summation," he said.
"A dictatorship of relativism is being built that recognizes nothing as definite," Ratzinger said, "and which leaves as the ultimate measure only one's ego and desires."
Their status in the church as a personal prelature is cast in canon law and is not subject to a particular pope's goodwill.
"This is a hard decision and a very heavy decision," said Sister Mary Ann Walsh, a spokeswoman for the US Conference of Catholic Bishops.
When Pope John Paul II arrived at Opus Dei headquarters one March day 11 years ago, even members of the conservative lay religious movement long accustomed to Vatican favor saw the visit as a singular moment in the group's ascendancy within the Roman Catholic Church.
This conclave feels the full weight of the church's modern challenges, including the influence of Islam, competition from evangelical Christians, the fallout from priest sex scandals, the roles of women and the need to reconcile Vatican teachings that ban condom use with worries about AIDS.
Even non-Catholic visitors said they are paying close attention to the goings-on.
On Sunday, the cardinals moved into the super-secure Domus Sanctae Marthae, a euro26 million (US$20 million) hotel that John Paul had constructed inside Vatican City so they could rest in comfort in private rooms between voting sessions.
"This election involves not only the church, but all of humanity."
Cardinals faced a choice that boiled down to two options: an older, skilled administrator who could serve as a "transitional" pope while the church absorbs John Paul's legacy, or a younger dynamic pastor and communicator _ perhaps from Latin America or elsewhere in the developing world where the church is growing _ who could build on the late pontiff's popularity over a quarter-century of globe-trotting.
It was likely that most of the cardinals were well familiar with Ratzinger's thinking, and his belief that the church's first priority should be to shore up the doctrinal walls.
This year, bells also will ring when a pope is elected.
Vatican spokesman Joaquin Navarro-Valls said smoke from burned ballot papers enhanced by special chemicals likely could be seen at around noon (1000 GMT) and around 7 p.m. (1700 GMT) on each day of voting by the cardinal electors, all of whom are under age 80.
The ballots are burned in an old stove, and when someone wins, a chemical will be added to turn the smoke white.
Placing his hand on the book of the Gospels, each cardinal added:
"If the faith is strong, then the church can take on these other issues," said de Souza, who writes a syndicated column.
"For the rest of my life, I'll keep this moment in my heart," said Dias, a 27-year-old architect from Natal, Brazil.
"So help me God and these Holy Gospels which I touch with my hand."
Latin America has 20 voting cardinals -- and nearly half the church's followers.
"Relativism," he has said, implies -- wrongly -- that other faiths are equally valid.
Newhouse News Service and The Associated Press contributed to this report.
All were dressed in their traditional red-trimmed black cassocks, their waists wrapped in scarlet sashes and their heads bobbing beneath scarlet skullcaps.
Some drove themselves; others were chauffeured.
The daily La Stampa said cardinals gearing up for a stressful stretch of days had packed CD players and headphones in their bags along with prayer books and snacks to nibble on in their rooms.
The idea of a conclave, which literally means "with key," was started by church people as a means of inconveniencing the cardinals to make them speed up the process.
He and a theologian chosen to deliver an inspirational message remained.
``First, you have all these dedicated lay Catholics.
"Whether that's a campaign statement or requirement of what the next guy must have -- that remains to be seen."
Italy has the biggest national group, but the bloc of 20 cardinals is not big enough for them to pick a pope on their own.
Lines of television cameras were all pointed at the same angle.
The Vatican's security squad swept the chapel for listening devices, and cooks, maids, elevator operators and drivers were sworn to secrecy, with excommunication the punishment for any indiscretions.
Swiss Guards, their gaily colored uniforms covered by dark rain gear, saluted the prelates as they were whisked to the residence in limousines.
Herranz said the organization had been subjected to negative publicity, but that such attacks were attacks on Christianity as a whole, not just Opus Dei.
``Given that they're ... responsible only to the pope, that is a sword that cuts both ways.
``A dictatorship of relativism is established that recognizes nothing as definitive and that leaves as the final standard only one's own ego and desires.''
But Ratzinger turned 78 Saturday, which Vatican analysts say could be a concern because, even though Ratzinger appears healthy, the cardinals might want to avoid the prospect of another frail, ailing pope in the short-term.
"Yet relativism, that is, letting oneself being carried 'here and there by any wind of doctrine,' appears as the sole attitude good enough for modern times."
In another sign of the group's influence, the pope placed Opus Dei's founder, the Spanish priest Josemaria Escriva de Balaguer on the fast track to sainthood in 1992, leapfrogging over Pope John XXIII.
``How many ideological currents, how many fashions of thought?''
Cardinals are prohibited from written correspondence or telephone conversations with anyone besides one another and workers who have taken an oath of secrecy.
At the edge of the large column-lined square, people paused at a newsstand selling the Vatican newspaper L'Osservatore Romano, which on Monday featured a four-page spread with photos of each of the 115 voting cardinals _ one of whom almost certainly will be the new pontiff.
Black smoke from burning ballots with wet straw will appear once each morning and afternoon if no one is selected.
"Providence sends a pope for every era," he said.
Other presumed front-runners include a slew of Italian cardinals, including Dionigi Tettamanzi, Angelo Sodano and Carlo Martini; Latin Americans Jorge Mario Bergoglio of Argentina, Oscar Rodriguez Maradiaga of Honduras and Claudio Hummes of Brazil; a Nigerian, Francis Arinze; and an Indian, Ivan Dias.
On Saturday, Vatican officials allowed a pool of reporters to enter the Sistine Chapel, now set up for the election.
"Behind every single word in the constitution for election of a pope, you'll find historical reasons we do it that way," said Charles Burns, retired Vatican archivist.
It is based on the idea that Catholics, male and female, can live a sanctified life without being priests or nuns.
The German cardinal, who turned 78 on Saturday, described the church as a ``little boat of Christian thought'' buffeted by waves of Marxism, liberalism, libertinism, collectivism, radical individualism, atheism, agnosticism and syncretism.
It was Ruini who last year opened proceedings to declare Opus Dei's del Portillo a saint.
For the first time, credible papal contenders come from at least three distinct regions: Europe, Africa and Latin America.
But at least a dozen other names are regularly mentioned.
Nuns sat in circles, praying and thumbing through rosaries.
The "scrutineers," three randomly selected cardinals who will count the votes, face Michelangelo's monumental "Last Judgment."
Cardinals will sit in plain wooden chairs at six long tables in a room decorated with some of the world's most famous artwork including Michelangelo's ceiling.
L.A. Times-Washington Post News Service
"Either as a candidate or a grand elector, he's definitely in a very strong position, and he wouldn't have made this statement if he was standing alone," Pham said.
The cardinals also must seek a global pastor with enough charisma to flourish in an image-driven age.
But critics have called the group elitist, and it is depicted as a villainous secret society in Dan Brown's best-selling novel, ``The Da Vinci Code.''
Many of its 85,000 worldwide members work in legal, medical, financial and media professions and profess unquestioned fidelity to the church's teachings and loyalty to the pope.
Luis Serrano, a 28-year-old priest from Isla Margarita, Venezuela, who is studying theology in Rome.
Before the cardinals entered the Sistine Chapel and declared "extra omnes" _ Latin for "all out" _ they held a final Mass, which was broadcast on four giant screens in the square.
PICK UP 4th graf: Wearing crimson robes xxx
"I feel like crying," said Casillas, 25, from the town of Tepatitlan.
John Paul II's 1996 rules require that two "trustworthy technicians" make sure that no audiovisual equipment is installed.
If neither can reach the two-thirds threshold, the field could open to numerous possible candidates.
The rules called for them to leave after the address.
"I've seen Masses here on television, but I never imagined when I got here I'd feel him so close to me," she said.
Thousands of people turned out, many weeping as they absorbed the solemnity of the occasion.
Gayle White writes for The Atlanta Journal-Constitution.
He called the coverage "a persecution of the church" and said it was characterized by "a fury which reminds me of the times of Diocletian and Nero and, more recently, Stalin and Hitler."
Alfwani said he hopes the next pope will pay particular attention to "inculturation," making sure that the church is assimilated into different cultures, including those of Africa.
Its prelate, Bishop Javier Echevarria, has called for prayer, not politicking.
The smoke then turned unmistakably black, indicating that, as expected, more than one ballot would be needed before the conclave finished its work.
In his homily Monday, Ratzinger said that Christians were tossed on the waves of Marxism, liberalism and even "libertinism;" of radical individualism, atheism and vague mysticism.
Commentators agreed that while the cardinal had been saying similar things for decades, hearing them expressed, and so sharply at that, just before the conclave was unexpected.
Many of the cardinals, draped in bright-red vestments and wearing white mitres, watched intently as Ratzinger spoke on a platform below Bernini's bronze baldacchino.