The REAL ID Act would require states to verify that people who apply for a driver's license are in the country legally.
The House is likely to pass the Real ID Act as early as Thursday and the Senate next week, as an attachment to an 81- billion-dollar emergency spending bill to the military in Iraq and Afghanistan.
Proponents of the measure, dubbed the REAL ID Act, dismissed Calvo's predictions as exaggerations from a special interest group and say that the bill would stop foreign terrorists from obtaining driver's licenses that they could use to travel in the United States.
The Real ID Act was added to the spending bill in the House in an effort spearheaded by Rep. James Sensenbrenner, R-Wis., chairman of the House Judiciary Committee.
The Real ID Act was added to the spending bill in the House in an effort spearheaded by Rep. James Sensenbrenner, R-Wis., chairman of the House Judiciary Committee.
The residents of states that don't comply won't be allowed to use the driver's licenses as identification to board planes or apply for Social Security and other federal benefits.
If the states refuse to comply with the new law, they "will become even more of a haven for terrorists and illegal aliens to get their driver's licenses," he said.
The residents of states that don't comply won't be allowed to use the driver's licenses as identification to board planes or apply for Social Security and other benefits.
The House had included the rules and other the immigration provisions in its version of the bill paying for the U.S. operations in Iraq and Afghanistan.
But the section likely to create the most controversy would make it more difficult for states to issue driver's licenses to illegal immigrants.
Touted as an antiterrorism measure, the "Real ID Act" would also overturn laws in nine states that allow illegal immigrants to obtain driver's licenses.
Cheye Calvo, director of the Transportation Committee of the National Conference of State Legislators said the driver's license measure would cause chaos and backlogs in thousands of department of motor vehicle offices across the country, making the nation less secure.
The bill would require people applying for or renewing driver's licenses to confirm their legal status in the United States.
The bill would require people applying for or renewing driver's licenses to confirm their legal status in the United States.
House and Senate negotiators are working to reconcile two versions of the emergency spending bill, one of which includes the immigration provisions.
Most who apply for new licenses -- and presumably, those seeking renewals -- would have to prove that they are in the United States legally, possess document of their social security number and home address and show a photo ID.
Last month the House attached the act to an emergency spending bill for Iraq and other needs, forcing the Senate to consider it.
Indeed, Culberson said he and his allies in the House would vote against the military spending bill if the immigration provisions are removed.
Residents of states that don't comply with the law would not be allowed to use their driver's licenses as federal identification, needed to board commercial aircraft, for example.
The immigration provisions, which were introduced as the Real ID Act in January, include new identification requirements for people seeking driver's licenses, toughened standards for immigrants seeking asylum in the United States, and money to complete a three-mile stretch of border fencing near San Diego.
"We need action now, and the only sure way to enact immigration change is to attach it to an emergency spending bill."
"The REAL ID Act is the most blatant attack on immigrant rights since the last major overhaul of immigration law in 1996," he said.
Jeff Lungren, a spokesman for the House Judiciary Committee, said that negotiations on the Real ID Act "are going well" and involved the leadership in both chambers.
Sensenbrenner's bill would compel states to add security features to all driver's licenses and create a license database that other states could access.
The Real ID Act, which restricts illegal immigrants from getting driver's licenses and tightens asylum laws, is expected to be approved or rejected by House and Senate negotiators Thursday.
WASHINGTON - Congress is poised to pass a law that would make sweeping changes to the nation's system for issuing driver's licenses by imposing stringent requirements on states to verify the authenticity of birth certificates, Social Security cards, legal residency visas, and bank and utility records used to obtain a license.
"We would bring it down if we need to," he said.
If states did not comply within three years, their driver's licenses could not be used as ID to board a plane or to enter certain federal buildings.
In a letter to Congress dated Monday, Joshua Bolten, director of the Office of Management and Budget, strongly encouraged Congress to include the immigration provisions and said the legislation would "strengthen the ability of the United States to protect against terrorist entry into and activities within the United States."
A key feature of the bill is the denial of driver's licenses to illegal immigrants.
If a state does not comply with any provision of the law, its residents would no longer be able to use their driver's licenses for federal identification purposes, such as for boarding a plane.
Florida has a document identification system for Social Security cards, passports, immigration documents and other documents that have certain security features.
Sensenbrenner's spokesman Jeff Lungren said the rules do not create a national ID card but are "merely settings standards for the states" and building on states' ongoing efforts to boost driver's license security.
Sensenbrenner introduced the Real ID Act in January.
The provisions are attached to an emergency spending bill that would provide $81 billion for military efforts in Iraq and Afghanistan.
The measure, which restricts illegal immigrants from getting driver's licenses and tightens U.S. asylum laws, was approved by House and Senate negotiators Tuesday.
A bipartisan House-Senate conference committee is expected to agree on a compromise version of the bill today; each chamber is slated to vote on the measure within the next two weeks and then send it to President Bush for his signature.
Last month, House Judiciary Committee Chairman James Sensenbrenner succeeded in attaching his Real ID Act to a must-pass Iraq appropriations bill.
States will have three years to meet the new standards that include verifying applicants are American citizens or legal residents.
The bill would set national standards compelling states to issue driver's licenses only to those lawfully in the country.
If it passes, the Real ID Act could cause delays in motor vehicle registry offices as states scramble to meet the new requirements.
The Real ID Act would also demand more proof from asylum seekers.
Ideally, the Department of Homeland Security would coordinate with the Social Security Administration so that the only other information required would be a Social Security number, which in the future could be embedded in all four types of cards.
The federal government should set standards for the issuance of birth certificates and sources of identification, such as drivers licenses.
Residents of states that fail to comply could find that their licenses are useless as IDs at airports, grounding people unless they have passports to use as identification.
And without federal funding to accompany the federal requirements, some of the provisions will be difficult, if not impossible, for state motor vehicle administrators to implement," said Jason King, public affairs director with the American Association of Motor Vehicle Administrators.
In Utah and Tennessee, new laws mandate that undocumented immigrants turn over their driver's licenses and get new driving cards, which are not valid as official identification and cannot be used to board a plane.
As for American workers, we would have no less privacy than we have now.
We all say this is unacceptable; we say we want change.
"We're not really sure what's going to come out and how it's going to affect us," he said.
State legislators and governors say that the Real ID Act would lead to horrific delays at motor vehicle bureaus, that it would cost hundreds of millions of dollars more than Congress thinks, and that it would impose an unrealistic three-year deadline for having the verification system in place.
Proponents say the measure would stop foreign terrorists from obtaining driver's licenses which they could use to travel in the United States and would also stop terrorists from taking advantage of U.S. asylum laws.
Opponents say that the Real ID Act is an anti-immigrant measure that would not improve security and hasn't been vetted through the congressional process.
Alexander and other lawmakers said the rules established in the REAL ID Act will have unintended consequences.
The Senate did not, but negotiators included them in the final bill.
It was approved by the House last week and now goes to President George W. Bush, who is expected to sign it.
Proponents of the measure -- including a group of immigration control activists in town for a week of lobbying -- said they were cautiously optimistic, especially after the White House endorsed it in a letter to House and Senate conferees earlier this week.
Terrorism and homeland security issues aside, however, the principle of the rule of law erodes in the United States when the government fails to enforce the law that prohibits U.S. employers from hiring workers who are illegally inside the United States.
418), which Congress likely will pass this year, requires states to verify the legal residency of driver's license applicants under threat of having the state's licenses banned for such federal uses such as boarding airplanes or cashing checks.
The commission recommended the federal government set standards for birth certificates and other identification documents, including driver's licenses.
The commission recommended the federal government set standards for birth certificates and other identification documents, including driver's licenses.
"It does much more than just deny driver's licenses to illegal immigrants."
Tim Sparapani, ACLU legislative counsel, said the Real ID Act's rules would result in a de facto national identification card because it would require states to pool driver data in a national database.
Nine states currently allow illegal immigrants to get licenses.
Other opponents of the immigration measure -- including immigrant advocates, religious groups, human rights organizations, the National Conference of State Legislators, and the American Civil Liberties Union -- were trying hard to stop it.
Jeff Lungren, a spokesman for the House Judiciary Committee, which spearheaded the REAL ID Act, said that the states that will be most affected are the ones doing poorly in verifying identification documents, including nine "problem" states--Wisconsin, Oregon, Maryland, Michigan, New Mexico, North Carolina, Washington, Hawaii and Montana.
It is part of an $82 billion emergency spending bill to fund military operations and rebuilding efforts in Iraq and Afghanistan, as well as tsunami relief efforts in Asia.
House Republican James Sensenbrenner of Wisconsin says his bill, the Real ID Act, will keep terrorists from crossing US borders.
House Republicans attached the bill to a must-pass supplemental spending package for troops in Iraq without first putting it through the usual legislative scrutiny of hearings and debate.
Creating a nationwide secure system of identification is an important national security issue.
Congress may pass a bill or two this year that nods in the direction of a national identification system.
Another proposal that could pass Congress this year calls for the Social Security Administration to replace all current paper Social Security cards with plastic cards that include a digitized photo with an "encrypted machine-readable electronic identification strip."
Opponents of the legislation also say that it could push more Americans to obtain passports for identification, if states can't comply with the difficult mandates.
Applicants for state-issued driver's licenses in the United States will be required to produce four types of identification when the Congress approves a plan to discourage illegal immigration, the USA Today newspaper reported Thursday.
Calvo said that language currently in the bill would require states to verify the authenticity of each identification document -- including birth certificates and utility bills, with the original sources.
New driver's license rules tucked in a military spending bill will create national identification cards for Americans and stick state governments with the bill, Republican Sen. Lamar Alexander said.
"Just because some senators have chosen not to address it and to ignore it doesn't mean that we don't need to have these provisions and bolster our border security now."
Frank Panela, spokesman for the Florida Department of Highway Safety & Motor Vehicles, said that Florida has no problem with the REAL ID Act, because the state already implements most of the new rules.
The law, some say, would effectively turn the new driver's license into a national identification card.
In addition, the American Civil Liberties Union says that a provision in the bill to link state driver's license databases would create a de facto national ID card and a "show us your papers" society.
Jeff Lungren, a Sensenbrenner spokesman, Monday rejected the notion that the bill could use further debate, arguing that the policy proposals contained in the Real ID Act have been public since Sensenbrenner tried unsuccessfully to include them in the 2004 intelligence overhaul law.
The Senate version did not include the immigration provisions.
The Senate version did not include the immigration provisions.
Lawmakers from both parties, as well as civil liberties groups and immigration advocates, decry the addition of the provisions to the must-pass supplemental bill.
It is expected to pass the House within days and the Senate next week.
House and Senate conferees are meeting now to reconcile their versions of the spending bill.
The 9/11 Commission Report called for a secure, standardized national identification system as a way to reduce the threat of terrorism and improve homeland security.
Moreover, civil libertarians argue that by creating uniform national standards for driver's licenses and requiring states to pool driver information in a national database, the bill is a back-door move to creating a national identification card, which they oppose on privacy grounds.
Each year, about 70 million people in the United States apply for new driver's licenses or renewals.
"If it passes, obviously, it's going to change they way we do business, exactly how is yet to be determined."
Fred Stratmann, spokesman for the Ohio Department of Motor Vehicles, said that the state would have "minor implementation issues" to comply with the new measure, including upgrading computers to store digital copies of identification documents.
Some states have voiced opposition to the REAL ID Act, and there are early signs that some may refuse to implement it for lack of funding, among other issues.
He also is pushing a temporary guest worker program to make it easier for illegal immigrants to work in the United States and is working hard to improve U.S.-Mexico relations.
Alexander, a Tennessee Republican, joined Democrats and state officials in railing against the White House-backed driver's license rules and other immigration measures before the Senate approved the $82 billion (euro63.79 billion) spending bill 100-0.
But Sensenbrenner is pushing hard to keep the measure on the final Iraq spending bill, and his opinion carries special weight in Congress.
All but one of the 19 hijackers in the Sept. 11 attacks had some form of U.S. identification, some of it fraudulent, the Sept. 11 commission found.
This is not the first time Congress has been told that a secure national identification system was needed to cure one problem or another.
They sold it as part of national security."
The cards would have to have photos.
Same day driver's licenses could become a thing of the past under legislation near final approval in Congress, the National Conference of State Legislators said Tuesday.
And we will not put an end to the illegal influx until we find a way to prevent employers from hiring unauthorized workers.
The provisions also would raise the standard of proof that asylum applicants must meet if they claim that they have been persecuted on ethnic, religious or political grounds in their home countries.
The National Conference of State Legislators has estimated that this effort would cost $500 million.
"They're going to stick it on the supplemental, and it's going to stay on there," Senate minority leader Harry Reid, Democrat of Nevada, said Monday.
The rules are aimed at stopping illegal immigrants from getting driver's licenses to prevent them from boarding planes or entering protected federal buildings.
The House version contains the immigration provisions but the Senate's version does not.
The provision was folded into an emergency military spending bill that earmarks $82 billion (euro63.65 billion) for the war in Iraq.
Six Republican senators last week expressed similar concerns when they signed a letter asking Senate majority leader Bill Frist, Republican of Tennessee, not to let the Real ID Act appear in the final bill.
Furthermore, high-level lobbying by the Real ID measures' author, Judiciary Committee Chairman Rep. James Sensenbrenner, House Majority Leader Tom DeLay and the White House helped silence discussion of handling the provisions as separate legislation.
Rowland Nethaway is senior editor of the Waco (Texas) Tribune-Herald.
Advocates say the new measure could actually backfire because many undocumented immigrants' personal information will no longer be kept in state databases, making it much harder to track them.
They also say that, with fewer licensed drivers, they expect an increase in drivers who lack auto insurance.
Driver's license examiners trained to decide whether a person can parallel park will have to determine whether an applicant is an al-Qaida terrorist, he said.
Our view is that provisions of this law will prove largely unattainable."
-- Tamar Jacoby is a senior fellow at the Manhattan Institute and editor of ``Reinventing the Melting Pot: The New Immigrants and What It Means to Be American'' (Basic Books).
Already under attack from both the right and the left, it has also provoked calls for still tougher measures, including a national ID card.
They were led by Senator Sam Brownback of Kansas, a lawmaker close to evangelical Christian groups who are particularly concerned about the asylum provisions.
"We feel pretty good about it," said Carlos Espinosa, spokesman for Rep. Tom Tancredo, R-Colo., a leading critic of illegal immigration.
Cory Smith, who has been tracking the asylum provisions for Human Rights First, called Lungren's comments "disingenuous."
It includes a gathering of 18 radio talk-show hosts from around the country.
At a press conference Tuesday hosted by the Federation for American Immigration Reform, a group that advocates reducing immigration, Rep. Dana Rohrabacher, R-Calif., said that illegal immigration is "threatening to our very survival as a nation" because it brings down wages and "destroys our health care and education system."
"They don't deserve a drivers license, they deserve to be driven to the border," and thrown over, said Rohrabacher, a nine-term lawmaker who chairs a science subcommittee.
The comment drew raucous applause and cheers from the crowd of about 150 people.
Meanwhile, voter fraud could be reduced with secure national IDs.
"State budgets, in many cases, are already in dire straits.
Not only do criminals often avoid justice because of a lack of standardized identification, citizens also avoid court orders for child support, custody laws and many other situations simply by skipping out to another state.
They are vital in various industries, including the business of getting food into grocery stores.
But in the long run, if it's done properly, a program of this kind would benefit everyone.
Still, unappealing as it may sound, an employer-verification system is e currently allowed): updated Social Securit y cards, driver's licenses, temporary worker's visas and green cards.
These inexpensive identity papers can include bogus Social Security cards, birth certificates, check-cashing cards and driver's licenses -- all available in most cities on both sides of the U.S.-Mexico border.
Motor vehicle department employees then would have to verify the documents with federal databases, a potentially lengthy process that could mean an end to same-day license renewals.
It took about a year to implement a real time verification system for Social Security numbers, she added.
As with credit card verification, responses would have to come in real time, and employers would learn only one thing about employees: whether they are authorized to work or not.
Are we prepared to do what it takes to secure our borders and restore the rule of law?
"We have a very secure Georgia driver's license to begin with," she said.
Susan Sports, public information officer with the Georgia Department of Motor Vehicle Safety, said that the state already verifies legal U.S. residency and Georgia residency and that employees are trained to spot fake documents.
"We are already way ahead of the game," he said.
Such changes are being drafted by several senators and are expected to include a proposed guest worker program that would allow immigrants already in the United States to work legally.
But most of the illegal immigrants who get licenses in the nine states that grant them are trying to earn a living, not commit terrorist acts.
Its chief champion, House Judiciary Chairman James Sensenbrenner, Republican of Wisconsin, says the measure would help prevent terrorists from fraudulently gaining official documents that would allow them to enter the country and move freely.
The new rules were written by Rep. James Sensenbrenner, House Judiciary Committee chairman, who failed in attempts to include similar provisions in an intelligence reorganization bill signed by President George W. Bush last year.
This was the conclusion of the Jordan commission report on immigration reform.
All but one of the 19 hijackers in the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks had some form of U.S. identification, some of it fraudulent, the Sept. 11 commission found.
In 1995, the bipartisan Commission on Immigration Reform, chaired by former Congresswoman Barbara Jordan, concluded that immigration laws and employer sanctions could never be enforced without some form of secure national ID cards and with an accompanying database of citizens and others who are in the country legally.
Such a process could take time and states would hope for federal funding to help, Sports said.
It has not been subjected to any hearings, debate, amendments, or any votes at all by this body."
The asylum rules are unnecessary, said Joseph Vail, a former immigration judge and director of the Immigration Clinic at the University of Houston Law Center.
As with credit histories, employees who were denied work would have access to their records and an easy-to-use appeals process.
Mike Huckabee, vice chairman of the National Governors Association, has said "if more than half of the governors agree we're not going down without a fight on this, Congress will have to consider changing" the rules.
"This country has been known to have safe haven for people, and we're fearful that, with this measure, that won't happen," said Judith Golub, senior director of advocacy and public affairs of the American Immigration Lawyers Association.
Authorized immigrants would welcome a card they could rely on, and they would face less discrimination than they are currently exposed to.
Who are these people in Washington telling us what to do with our driver's licenses and making us pay for them, too?'"
Not a single immigrant is going to be returned to his or her home country if they're denied a driver's license."
Lungren said that will be addressed in appropriations bills.
But Calvo said the real amount is more likely to be between $500 million and $700 million when the cost of such items as new equipment to tap into national databases is included.
The measure gives them three years to meet the new standards.
Critics say the measure would result in more dangerous roadways, with thousands of illegal immigrants driving without licenses or insurance.
They should leave the Real ID Act on the cutting room floor.
Tom Vinger, spokesman with the Texas Department of Public Safety, said that the department was monitoring the REAL ID legislation "with great interest," but he didn't want to comment until a final bill was passed.
A bill that would enact hotly contested immigration rules, including one that would bar illegal immigrants from getting driver's licenses, is marching toward approval with the backing of the White House.
Republican leaders promised him last December that the Real ID Act would get a quick hearing in 2005 after he agreed to remove it from a major intelligence overhaul bill that the Bush administration needed to pass.
Opponents also complained that the immigration measures were combined with an emergency measure for military spending, forcing a rushed vote with no Senate hearings amid heavy political pressure.
The bill is urgently needed to fund military operations and rebuilding efforts in Iraq and Afghanistan, as well as tsunami relief efforts in Asia.
Moreover, political observers say the Bush administration is unwilling to antagonize Sensenbrenner because, as Judiciary Committee chairman, he will hold sway over President Bush's proposal to reform the immigration system by establishing a system of guest worker visas.
The 9/11 Commission Report, quoted above, is clear.
Though the idea of creating national databases has grown more acceptable since 9/11, the mere mention of worker ID cards is still enough, in most circles, to end all discussion of an employment-based strategy.
That's a valid consideration, of course, since national security must always be at the top of the list of national priorities.
"This legislation has never been considered by the Senate.
They put it on a supplemental, which they knew you couldn't stop.
"This bill has not received a single hearing in either chamber of Congress, so the challenges it presents for states have never received any attention," said Cheye Calvo of the National Conference of State Legislatures.
On Tuesday, a state judge in New York ruled that the Department of Motor Vehicles may not deny licenses to those who cannot prove they are citizens.
Henderson and other advocates said the more than 10 million undocumented immigrants already in the country _ with more arriving monthly _ demonstrate the pressing need for comprehensive immigration reform.
We already provide this information when we get hired for a new job.
In most of the states now, the new drivers are typically required to produce proof of age and one or two other forms of ID, usually including a photo.
We might start with temporary workers only, or with one sector -- say, agriculture.
"We think that the long-term future of North America is more ties between communities, but when we see fences going up, it seems to send the wrong message," said Nestor Rodriguez, co-director of the Center for Immigration Research at the University of Houston.
It should bite the bullet and pass a federal national ID system.
National Conference of State Legislators: www.ncsl.org
But this bill ignores the real need for laws that let immigrant workers travel safely and legally between the United States and Mexico.
The end result will be that qualified asylum-seekers will be denied asylum."
Less is required for those renewing licenses, and a few states, including Maryland, allow renewals by mail.
"I don't think Congress really knows what they are mandating," he said.
And even some policymakers who favor a temporary worker program are beginning to think this might require some sort of employee ID.
Some states have threatened to challenge the new driver's license orders in court and even disobey them.
Lundgren said that the estimates are not based on fact and that the Congressional Budget Office estimated the effort would cost $100 million in five years.
Congress created a panel to negotiate new driver's license standards, but the new rules supersede the panel.
Congress created a panel to negotiate new driver's license standards, but the new rules supersede the panel.
It would also make it harder for immigrants to gain amnesty, and easier to override environmental laws to build a barrier along the Mexican border in California.
Supporters of the provisions know that it would be politically unwise for anyone to vote against a bill that sends money to American soldiers.
"This wasn't vetted, and it was attached to this political must-pass bill," said Christine Gleichert, legislative director for the American-Arab Anti-Discrimination Committee.
Several of the groups were planning a telephone conference call on Thursday to urge lawmakers to drop the legislation from a larger emergency spending bill.
In recent years, identity theft has become a burgeoning criminal industry thanks to the lack of a nationwide secure system of identification.
It's hardly surprising that the last time we tried an employer-based approach -- penalties against businesses that hire illegal workers are part of the landmark Immigration Reform and Control Act (IRCA) that Congress passed in 1986 -- it was so watered down as to be all but irrelevant.
Along with extra security at airports and workplaces, the act could represent the most significant differences in daily lives to stem from post Sept. 11 security concerns, according to the report.
The Senate should block this ill-conceived proposal and take a more measured look at immigration reform.
First time passports for adults could cost as much as $97, including security fees.
Immigrant rights groups on Wednesday attacked the Senate's passage of new driver's license rules aimed at preventing terrorism, saying they won't secure the nation and reflect surging hostility toward the foreign-born in the United States.
They have snuck across the border illegally, arrived as stowaways on ships, used false passports, and have been granted amnesty.
"Rather than spending our time diddling about with issues of who's going to drive and who's not going to drive in this country, we should address the whole question of immigration reform," said Cesar Perales, president of the Puerto Rican Legal Defense and Education Fund, based in New York.
"It's possible that some governor may look at this and say, 'Wait a minute.
"This bill imposes significant new burdens that will affect all Americans, anyone who has to go to the DMV is affected by this bill."
They have also been [legal permanent residents] and naturalized US citizens.
Illegal immigration should be discouraged.
But any employee need produce only one.
But ending the illegality is going to take more than a few miles of new fence.
Think about it -- think about both the costs and the benefits -- the next time you use your credit card.
We relish our privacy, we bristle at government interference in business -- and obviously any effort to prevent hiring one kind of worker will mean monitoring all hiring.
I've had a senator come to me and say, 'We're going to filibuster this.'
This would require states, within three years, to upgrade 3,000 departments of motor vehicle offices, train workers, and add employees to handle all the extra phone calls to utility companies, immigration offices, and 30,000 vital records offices, some of which are small and don't have any full time employees, he said.
None of this will be easy, and the public is right to be skeptical.
As it is, most Americans defy the law every day, many of us several times, benefiting one way or another from the work of illegal immigrants.
Terrorists have even used America's humanitarian tradition of welcoming those seeking asylum.
"When you condition travel on an identification card and create an internal registry of citizens and a way to track them, that is entirely contrary to most Americans' understandings of the way their country works and should work," Sparapani said.
"This legislation would make sweeping, controversial changes to our laws with respect to the environment, refugees, judicial review, the states' power to make decisions about their own laws, and other issues," Reid said.
This would essentially create a national ID card, an idea that should be thoroughly debated on its own, not slipped through a back door.
He was promised he could add them to the first bill guaranteed to get congressional approval.
"We know senators and members of Congress can't and won't vote against funding for our troops, but this provision should not have been attached to it.
"This is clearly an anti-immigrant bill that's going to have a very harmful impact on the Latino community and all immigrant communities," said Michele Waslin, director of immigration policy research at the National Council of La Raza.
"America is a country of paradoxes: We are a country of immigrants, yet we attack immigrants," said Wade Henderson, president of the Leadership Council on Civil Rights, a coalition group in Washington, D.C. that in March sent a petition _ signed by 64 member organizations _ calling on legislators to vote against the act.
Civil liberties groups worry the move takes the country closer to a national ID card.
"Since that [intelligence] bill passed about five months or so ago, this issue has continued to be at the forefront," Lungren said.
Now that spending measure is coming up in the Senate, and though it's unclear how the upper chamber will handle the congressman's proposal, members are girding for an all-out fight over immigration.
Should it emerge intact from House-Senate negotiations over the spending package, it could be law next month.
Many victims of torture and abuse are unlikely to be able to provide such evidence, especially if they come from countries where law enforcement officials are blind to, or complicit in, abuses.
Such a system could help curb identity theft.
Immigrants' advocates say the measure is the latest example of America's increasingly hostile climate toward foreign-born residents, an atmosphere dramatically worsened by the terror attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, and continually fueled by the ongoing war in Iraq.
"There is not one example of a terrorist having been granted asylum.
A MISTAKEN ID BILL CONGRESS IS in danger of passing legislation that could damage immigration policy under the false pretense of enhancing national security.
"If you think a trip to the division of motor vehicle is a bad experience today, wait until the REAL ID takes effect," Sen. Dick Durbin, an Illinois Democrat, said.
Employers would get the workers they need with much less trouble -- the current paper-based system is notoriously cumbersome -- and more peace of mind.
Some state DMV offices showed a lower level of concern about the legislation, saying that they already comply with many of the provisions, but that implementaion of the entire proposal could be time consuming and costly.
Any expansion of the program would be tied to proof that it was working well.
But the rhetoric promises more protection than the bill delivers.
The Sensenbrenner legislation, tagged as a security measure, is a hodgepodge of provisions: one aimed at finishing a few miles of fence on the border near Tijuana, another raising barriers to asylum seekers who claim they are fleeing abuse in their home countries.
"In the short term, there will be lots of confusion," Henderson said.
The driver's licence issue has energized groups upset about illegal immigration.
Georgia does not, however, verify each birth certificate with the original source, instead relying on the certification on each document, she said.
"The standards are already extremely high," he said.
Some states feel the changes present a bureaucratic burden and some experts say illegal immigrants will continue to drive, but without insurance.
But many critics of the Real ID Act say that it goes too far and that its language is riddled with problems that might have been corrected through the normal legislative review process.
"Ohio is in very good shape in implementing what the law requires," he said.
The bill allows the Homeland Security secretary to provide grants to states to help defray costs, but it includes no money for them.
But Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid, D-Nev., said that Democrats have been "completely shut out of the backroom negotiations" in "yet another example of the Republican leadership's abuse of power."
It's crunch time on a major piece of immigration legislation and all sides are stepping up the pressure.
The bill would pay for supplies, services, training and facility improvements for U.S. troops overseas and also fund various programs, such as those that buy back weapons from foreign insurgents and counter-drug efforts in Afghanistan.
Without a standardized, secure national system capable of telling citizen from noncitizen, U.S. employers routinely are let off the hook when job applicants show them any number of easily obtained fake identity papers or valid identity cards that offer no proof of citizenship.
Immigration reform is back on the table -- with a vengeance.
And of course it would hardly make sense except in the context of immigration reform that provided U.S. industries reliant on foreign laborers with enough legal workers to function and grow.
Unfortunately, it likely will take another commission report before lawmakers get behind a nationwide identity program.
Several states fear the new rules will be costly, provide little protection against invasions of privacy and identity theft, and make getting a driver's license a bigger headache for Americans.
It offers false security instead of intelligent reform.
Equally important, the new system must be phased in over time.
"There has not been careful consideration of these serious changes to asylum law and immigration policy."
"There was a broad coalition of groups that opposed the REAL ID Act ... and they'll continue to look at implementation.
It would also grant greater discretion to Homeland Security officials to reject asylum seekers and curtail the ability of appeals courts to issue stays of deportation orders and review rejected cases.
Most Americans detest that idea, to put it mildly.
American Association of Motor Vehicle Administrations: www.aamva.org
"It doesn't make us one iota safer.
And immigrant advocates fear the asylum changes are too draconian and will hurt people with legitimate claims of persecution.
Another set of provisions would significantly raise the standard of proof that asylum applicants must meet when claiming that they have been persecuted on ethnic, religious, or political grounds.
The license changes have raised several concerns.
"Stopping the flood of illegal immigrants and protecting our borders is my single highest legislative priority," Culberson said.
Sensenbrenner calls for more barriers and surveillance technology along the southern US border.
The real challenge is figuring out how to manage undocumented drivers.
Lungren pointed to a $100 million estimate by the Congressional Budget Office.
Some experts say the president's support for the tough immigration provisions sends mixed messages.
In a January column he writes: "The goal of the Real ID Act is straightforward: it seeks to prevent another 9/11-type attack by disrupting terrorist travel."
The act includes standardization, which is good.
Problems with this approach include yet another unfunded federal mandate, not to mention a shift in immigration responsibility to state agencies that aren't trained or equipped for the duty.
The bill's history in the House, where it passed on a 261-161 vote, holds crucial lessons for to them.
Another documented national growth industry involves easily obtained fake identification papers.
Mass deportation is unlikely because many of these drivers are essential to America's economy.
Government officials could ask for "corroborating evidence."
The unavoidable answer -- albeit deeply unpopular in this country -- is a credible ``employer verification'' system: one that replaces existing fraud-prone employment practices with a better way of ensuring that businesses hire only legal residents.
Calvo and Lungren also sparred over how much the driver's licensing provisions would cost.
In addition, state legislators and courts have already begun to craft their own rules on the issue.
"They have come as students, tourists, and business visitors.
Do we want a working system, economically realistic but also airtight?
(BEGIN ITAL)Recommendation: Secure identification should begin in the United States.
Companies -- especially small companies -- that wished to continue with the current paper-based method would be permitted to do so.
The only difference under the new system is that it would happen electronically.
Terrorists have "used almost every conceivable means of entering the country," Sensenbrenner said in a statement provided by an aide.
I am fed up with the complete lack of enforcement of our immigration laws."
Congress long has ignored notices that the United States needs a standardized method to be able to identify and track people who commit crimes in one state and easily take up residence and new identities in another state.
"I'm sure at some place somewhere years ago something about asylum was brought up, but there were no hearings on this," he said.
Existing databases would have to be vastly improved: The 10-year-old pilot program that some businesses already use to verify workers' identities still produces far too many false hits, though the number is declining.
"It's a terrible piece of legislation.
"Legislating in such a complex area without the benefit of hearings and expert testimony is a dubious exercise and one that subverts the Senate's deliberative process," said the letter, which was also signed by Republicans John McCain of Arizona, Lamar Alexander of Tennessee, John Sununu of New Hampshire, Chuck Hagel of Nebraska, and Richard Lugar of Indiana.
Some lawmakers, including Houston Republican Rep. John Culberson, a staunch advocate of stronger immigration controls, are completely dedicated to making sure the provisions remain in the bill.
Some are in Washington this week for a six-day lobbying effort on various immigration topics.