But he was arrested after saying he was the driver of the SUV that was struck by the train.
People on the train and in the neighborhood near the tracks saw Alvarez as he ran away from his vehicle.
But then in the early morning darkness of Wednesday, Alvarez introduced his troubled life to the world when he drove his Jeep Cherokee onto the commuter railroad tracks of Glendale in metropolitan Los Angeles, killing at least 10 people and injuring about 200 more.
Alvarez, who is on the suicide watch list, drove his Jeep Cherokee on the tracks, then changed his mind about taking his life and fled from the vehicle when the train was approaching.
Authorities said the SUV, a Jeep Cherokee, was left on the tracks by an apparently suicidal man, who jumped from the vehicle moments before the southbound commuter train plowed into it.
"He exited the vehicle and stood by as a southbound Metrolink train struck his vehicle, causing the train to derail and strike the northbound train," the police chief said.
"People were screaming, one lady was crying, people were moaning, all kinds of painful noises," said Richard Mendevil, who was on his way home to Santa Clarita from Los Angeles' Union Station in the northbound Metrolink train, when it was hit by a southbound train that had derailed after hitting the light truck and an idle Union Pacific work train.
He apparently changed his mind about killing himself, abandoned the vehicle and watched the crash, the Glendale police chief, Randy G. Adams, said.
A southbound commuter train heading to downtown Los Angeles hit the Jeep Grand Cherokee parked on the tracks, said Glendale Police Chief Randy G. Adams.
Trains on the line can travel as fast as 79 mph, but the two trains involved in the crash were probably going slower because the southbound train was approaching the Glendale station and the northbound train had just left it, Solow said.
He exited the vehicle and stood by as the southbound Metrolink train struck his vehicle, causing the train to derail and strike the northbound train.''
"He exited the vehicle and stood by as the southbound Metrolink train struck his vehicle, causing the train to derail and strike the northbound train."
Several train passengers said they saw Alvarez jump from his SUV just before the southbound train plowed into the vehicle, Adams said.
On the northbound train, headed from Union Station to Burbank, Nelson Goyzueta said he watched the rail car in front of his rock back and forth on the track before toppling to the side.
His intent was to kill himself, but he changed his mind after his SUV got stuck between the tracks in an area slightly away from the grade crossing.
He decided not to go through with it, but the vehicle got stuck between the tracks, the police said.
Glendale Police Chief Randy Adams said Juan Manuel Alvarez, who intentionally parked his Jeep on the rail tracks and caused the train collision, will be facing at least 10 counts of homicide.
Metrolink train 100, a four-car train being pushed by a locomotive, was southbound from Moorpark to Los Angeles and approaching the Glendale station at 6:02 a.m. when its front car hit Alvarez's Jeep.
The train then apparently crashed into a northbound Metrolink commuter train, and a stationary Union Pacific freight train was hit and knocked off the tracks, officials said.
Chief Randy G. Adams of the Glendale police said he was "very confident" that he had the right man, going by Alvarez's own admissions and witnesses on the train who saw him run.
He was to stand in court on Thursday afternoon and answer the charges, but his appearance was postponed until Friday because he was too weak from wounds he made to his wrists and chest before the wreck, prosecutors said.
Distraught and remorseful, Alvarez told police he had left the vehicle and watched the derailment, Adams said.
Alvarez, 25, despondent over the breakup of his marriage, had planned to kill himself when he drove his green Jeep Grand Cherokee in the path of a Metrolink train, officials said, but he bolted from the vehicle at the last moment.
At least 10 people were killed and more than 180 injured Wednesday when a commuter train derailed after crashing into a car parked on tracks north of Los Angeles, then sideswiped an oncoming train, knocking it off its rails.
After hitting the Jeep Grand Cherokee on the tracks, the front of southbound Train 100 hurtled into a Union Pacific locomotive parked on a parallel track, while its other cars swept into oncoming northbound Train 901.
Glendale police said that Juan Manuel Alvarez, 25, of the Los Angeles suburb of Compton, drove around barriers at a grade crossing and then up the Metrolink commuter rail tracks, where his Jeep Grand Cherokee became wedged between the rails.
When he could not get his vehicle off the tracks, he ran.
The out-of-control train struck an idle Union Pacific work train on a track just west of the Metrolink rails, knocking the locomotive on its side.
After striking the Union Pacific train, the southbound train slammed into an oncoming Metrolink train, number 901, northbound from Los Angeles to the San Fernando Valley.
And so sometime Wednesday morning, Alvarez, 25, drove himself to the Glendale tracks, near the City of Los Angeles boundary and parked his car.
The remaining cars collided with northbound Metrolink Train 901, which was on the track to the east after leaving the Glendale Station.
A southbound commuter train from Ventura County struck the Jeep at about 6 a.m. local time and caromed into a stationary freight train locomotive before colliding with a northbound commuter train from Union Station in downtown Los Angeles.
``This is a complete outrage,'' Los Angeles County Sheriff Lee Baca angrily told reporters at the scene of mangled rail cars and smoking wreckage in the suburb of Glendale, north of downtown Los Angeles.
"But this car was wedged between the tracks and the only way for the cab car to go was up."
Because Alvarez's truck was wedged between the rails and not sitting at a grade crossing, it became an "immovable object," Solow said, vaulting the front car of the train into the air and causing the cars behind it to twist on their couplings and fold in on each other like an accordion.
Glendale Police Chief Randy Adams said Alvarez -- who officials said had tried to commit suicide earlier by slashing his wrists and cutting himself -- watched the chaos after fleeing his vehicle.
A "deranged" man abandoned his SUV on railroad tracks when he aborted a suicide attempt, authorities said, and then watched as a Metrolink commuter train slammed into it, setting off a spectacular three-train collision that left at 11 least dead and more than 180 injured Wednesday.
100 smashed into the SUV and derailed, then rammed a parked Union Pacific freight train and collided with another Metrolink train heading north out of Union Station.
Juan Manuel Alvarez, 25, of Compton, the driver of the Jeep Grand Cherokee, was found near the wreckage and arrested on suspicion of homicide.
After hitting the car, the packed rush-hour train, which was bound for Los Angeles' Union Station, jumped its tracks and jack-knifed into the path of an oncoming commuter train heading in the opposite direction.
The commuter train folded up like an accordion -- its front car ramming into the Union Pacific freight train's locomotive on the track to the west, toppling it to its side.
Alvarez is accused of leaving a Jeep Cherokee on the tracks, causing the derailment of one train, which then crashed into another.
"I was on the second floor walking down the aisle and saw the lights of the oncoming train and watched it pass and then I was thrown up in the air, landed on a table and rolled off onto the floor," he said.
Alvarez had apparently meant to kill himself, investigators said, but changed his mind when he saw the train barreling down on him.
Adams said of Alvarez: ``I think his intent at that time was to take his own life, but changed his mind prior to the train actually striking this vehicle.
At 6:02 a.m., the three-car Train 100, headed from Moorpark to Union Station, with the locomotive in the rear, crashed into the SUV.
He was told she was taken to the hospital and released.
He was treated for his injuries and taken into custody and will be charged with at least 10 counts of murder, the chief said.
Meanwhile the driver of the vehicle that sparked the incident was expected to be charged with murder, police said.
He was aboard the southbound train, heading to work.
The driver of the SUV, identified as Juan Manuel Alvarez, 25, of Compton, Calif., was taken into custody, and police said he would be charged with homicide.
Among the dead was Los Angeles County Sheriff's Deputy James Tutino, 47, a 23-year veteran of the department, who was commuting to downtown Los Angeles from his home in Simi Valley.
He said as he got up from the floor he saw a fire on the tracks and a man with blood streaming down his face staggering alongside the listing rail car.
A man intent on committing suicide left his car on a railroad track in Glendale near downtown Los Angeles Wednesday, where it set off a collision that derailed two commuter trains, killing at least 10 people and injuring nearly 200, authorities said.
Mendevil, who was in the second car of the northbound train, said the collision came with no warning.
Ten people were killed and more than 100 injured Wednesday when two commuter trains slammed into each other after one of them hit a car left on the lines by a suicidal man, police said.
Just hours before maneuvering his car onto the tracks, Alvarez had twice tried to kill himself, slashing his wrists and stabbing himself in the chest, police said.
He drove onto the railroad tracks in Glendale, not far from the Los Angeles City line.
Mendevil said as he walked away from the wreckage, he saw the tailgate of a truck and a wheel and concluded that the train had hit a car or truck.
``I think his intent at that time was to take his own life, but (he) changed his mind prior to the train actually striking the vehicle.''
Because the SUV was "lodged on the tracks," it was unable to move, he said.
The driver allegedly manoeuvred his Jeep onto the tracks, where it became stuck, and waited for a train to end his life, according to Adams and other police officials.
At a joint news conference with Los Angeles Police Chief William Bratton and Glendale's Adams, Baca said he was especially upset because one of the dead was identified as Deputy James Tutino, a 23-year veteran of the Sheriff's Department.
The Glendale Police Department was leading the criminal investigation, with Los Angeles Police Department and the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department assisting.
"He was very distraught and upset when he realized he caused a major disaster," the chief said.
Key to the legal case, Cooley said, ``is the intent of the individual when he drove onto the tracks.''
"I think his intent at that time was to take his own life, but changed his mind prior to the train actually striking this vehicle," Adams said.
Steve Cooley, the Los Angeles County district attorney, said he would decide by the end of the week what charges he will bring against Alvarez.
A 25-year-old man was arrested following Wednesday's commuter train collision that killed at least 10 people near downtown Los Angeles.
"This whole incident was started by a deranged individual who was suicidal," he said announcing that the depressed driver, identified as Juan Manuel Alvarez, 26, was unhurt and was in custody.
Los Angeles County prosecutors on Thursday charged a man with 11 counts of murder, one for every person who died in a violent three-train wreck that they say he caused by driving his Jeep onto commuter railroad tracks in a botched suicide attempt.
Among the dead was a deputy in Baca's department who was riding the southbound train to work.
The SUV was hit shortly after 6 a.m. Pacific time by a southbound Metrolink train, which then went off the rails and started a deadly chain reaction, authorities said.
After derailing, the commuter train, which was being pushed by its engine, struck a Union Pacific locomotive parked on a side track, knocking it onto its side, fire department officials said.
The front car, a so-called cab car, has a compartment in the front for the engineer when the locomotive is in the back.
He was treated at the scene and sent home.
... That's when we saw the other train."
He said the crash was caused solely by the actions of the suspect.
Juan Miguel Alvarez, charged with murder with special circumstances in the deaths of 11 Metrolink passengers, slashed and stabbed himself after seeing the horrific train crash he caused, sources close to the investigation said Thursday.
Alvarez ran to safety and watched the carnage he had caused, witnesses told the police.
Adams said that before driving onto the tracks Alvarez cut his wrists and stabbed himself in the chest, inflicting superficial wounds.
"He was intent at that time on taking his own life but changed his mind," Adams told reporters.
At least 10 people were killed and hundreds were hurt in the crash that also disrupted morning rush hour commuter train traffic.
On Thursday, the National Transportation Safety Board said it would not conduct a full investigation of the crash because it appeared to be the result of a criminal act.
"Now that we have done further investigation, we know the self-inflicted wounds were received after he placed the car on the tracks and after he fled from the scene," one source said.
He said he did not know the man's name.
"He chickened out," said Sheriff Lee Baca of Los Angeles County.
Police arrested a man who they said would be charged with homicide in the crash that left train cars mangled and seared.
"He's carrying a lot of baggage and talked about killing himself," said Sheriff Lee Baca of Los Angeles County.
``This whole incident was started by a deranged individual that was suicidal,'' Glendale Police Chief Randy Adams told a news conference.
As he watched, southbound Train No.
Authorities believe Juan Manuel Alvarez drove his Jeep Grand Cherokee around the rail crossing barrier and onto the Metrolink train tracks at Chevy Chase Drive in Glendale about 6 a.m. Wednesday.
The commuter train that struck the car on Wednesday had the locomotive situated in the rear, pushing rather than pulling the passenger cars.
"We want to thank the 300 firefighters that rushed to the scene and are doing good action to rescue the injured people from the wreckage.
He said that the exact speeds, the various points of impact and the overall force of the collision would be determined by National Transportation Safety Board investigators.
Alvarez was charged early Thursday with 10 counts of murder with the special circumstances of multiple murders and murder caused by train derailment, an extremely rare charge.
Alvarez is likely to face at least 10 counts of murder, the chief said.
With his tire, apparently caught between the tracks, Mr. Alvarez jumped out of the Jeep and ran.
Adams said Alvarez had made some superficial attempts overnight to kill himself -- slitting his wrists and stabbing his chest -- and was treated for those wounds before being booked.
"He was having problems with drugs and all that and was violent, and because of that he separated from her," Amaya said in Spanish.
It sounded like the train was dragging something across the tracks,'' he told the Los Angeles Times.
One of the stricken trains then side-swiped a stationary freight train that was parked on a side-track in the area, knocking it over, officials said.
Instead of knocking it out of the way, the train's front cab car probably lifted up over the SUV, said Metrolink's CEO Dave Solow.
"Normally at a grade crossing the car is smashed to smithereens and the train stays on the track," Solow said.
Diesel fuel in the locomotive caught fire as a result of the crash, and flames spread to parts of the wreckage before firefighters extinguished them.
``These people were just going to work.''
As onlookers and emergency crews rushed to help those trapped in the flaming wreckage, Alvarez walked to a female friend's home in nearby Atwater Village, where he slashed his wrists and stabbed himself in the chest, the sources said.
When asked why Alvarez was in Glendale, the mayor responded, ``He came to Glendale to commit suicide.''
"This is a complete outrage as far as traffic safety is concerned," Los Angeles County Sheriff Lee Baca said.
"I got as far away as I could because I was worried about an explosion," he said.
It is too early to say exactly what those charges will be, District Attorney Steve Cooley said, but they could include multiple counts of murder, with special circumstances based on the number of deaths and nature of the crime.
"You don't put your car on the track and put yourself in harm's way and all these passengers in harm's way," said Los Angeles Sheriff Lee Baca, one of whose deputies was among the dead.
According to investigators, Alvarez spent the evening before slashing his wrists and even stabbed himself in the chest, but the wounds were superficial.
He was in police custody Wednesday evening, said to be distraught but cooperating.
Goddard Paialii, 53, of Los Angeles' San Fernando Valley, a communications electrician for the city of Los Angeles, said he boarded the train and rode in the lead car.
The Union Pacific train was a work train for track maintenance, with two locomotives and about 12 cars filled with ballast or gravel.
In January 2003, a Metrolink train smashed into a truck and derailed, killing the motorist and injuring 32 train passengers.
"We're trying to learn as much as we can from this."
Eleven people died and about 180 were injured in the crash at 6:02 a.m. Wednesday.
Rescuers were picking through the mangled wreckage of the trains that collided with an explosive crash just after 6:00 am (1400 GMT) after one of them derailed as it ploughed into the abandoned vehicle.
When those attempts failed, they said, he got into his car and headed for the tracks behind a Costco store.
Alvarez was held on 10 counts of murder, Adams said, although formal charges are lodged by the district attorney's office.
"He's not going to engage my sympathy because he was despondent," Cooley said.
"He did have enough wherewithal to jump out of the way of the train to preserve his life," Blatt said.
"On the other hand, just putting the car there on the tracks was extremely reckless."
"The third one did cartwheels -- it was way off to the side," said Goyzueta, who was on his way to work with other employees of Senior Aerospace in Burbank.
About 60 people were treated at the scene and released.
About 60 people were treated at the scene and released.
Within hours of the crash, Alvarez was arrested on suspicion of murder.
Metrolink trains in that area can go up to 79 mph, but officials said they were likely going slower with the Glendale station nearby.
He said the driver would be held accountable.
Alvarez, who was identified by witnesses at the scene, was detained there and appeared to have superficial self-inflicted injuries unrelated to the crash.
He was upstairs and said he was trying to nap, listening to his iPod.
Alvarez's sister-in-law, Maricela Amaya, told Telemundo TV that he had recently tried to see his boy and threatened to kill himself.
The charges include the special circumstances of using the train, which could make the man, Juan M. Alvarez, eligible for the death penalty.
The commuter train, en route to Union Station in Los Angeles from the western suburb of Moorpark, then buckled, sideswiping a passing northbound train that was headed toward Burbank.
It was the worst train wreck in the United States since March 1999, when an Amtrak train hit a truck and derailed in Illinois, killing 11 people and injuring about 100.
At that point, I just braced myself.
Staff writers Peter Hong, Jill Leovy, David Pierson, Wendy Thermos and Erica Williams contributed to this report.
Debris including seat cushions, bloody towels and luggage discarded by fleeing passengers littered the area.
Computers, seat pads, briefcases were flying all over.
She does community relations for IBM in Glendale.
``We heard a loud boom and the building shook,'' said Jenny Doll, 30, a Costco clerk.
Her sister, Leah Gillen, 35, waited at the hospital for news about her sister, who works for Para Los Ninos, a social-services agency in downtown Los Angeles.
He wrote "I love my kids" and "I love Leslie" using the heart symbol, Vilaubi said.
Elected officials expressed outrage at the tragedy but praised the rescue effort that reached across jurisdictions to handle the crisis.
"I just remember flipping and flipping and flipping.
We heard some gravel fly and then ... the big boom.
Authorities said 123 people were taken to 15 hospitals in the region and that about 40 were in critical condition.
Passengers described being hurled from their seats as the trains collided, and then rescuing one another from the wreckage in the predawn dark.
"He has been cooperative and he has talked to our investigators, " Adams said.
The National Transportation Safety Board has assigned 10 investigators to assist the Glendale Police Department.
"He just came to Glendale to commit suicide.
Alvarez was taken to USC Medical Center for treatment of his self-inflicted wounds, and police moved to book him on 10 counts of homicide.
"This is a complete outrage," Los Angeles Sheriff Lee Baca said in angry comments at a news conference.
"He came to Glendale to commit suicide," said Bob Yousefian, mayor of Glendale, a normally uneventful city of 210,000 just north of Los Angeles City Hall.
Rescue workers initially thought Alvarez was a victim of the train wreck when they found him wandering near the scene, bleeding from his wrists and chest.
"He kind of ran, tried to hide, but because of his previous injuries, he got apprehended."
Steve Cooley, the Los Angeles County district attorney, said in an interview that he would not decide whether to seek the death penalty until the case was thoroughly reviewed by his office.
"We have 10 fatalities so far and well over 100 injured," Glendale Police Chief Randy Adams told reporters, adding that the probe into the accident had turned into a homicide investigation.
He said he got on train 100 at 5:19 a.m. in Simi Valley.
Adams identified the suspect as Juan Manuel Alvarez, 25, of Compton, adding that he had attempted suicide before.
``It is a complete outrage as far as transportation safety is concerned.''
Passengers were tossed around the inside of their trains and some had to jump from the upper decks of the wreckage, eyewitnesses told reporters.
The police chief said Alvarez has a criminal record involving drugs.
Statements by law enforcement officials that the train crash was the result of an aborted suicide attempt don't support that notion, they said.
When detectives asked him to volunteer to a search of his residence, Alvarez said he did not have one, that he had been bouncing from couch to couch since he had a falling out with his wife, Carmelita.
"When the train came, he got scared, he couldn't go through with it.
Until Wednesday, Juan Manuel Alvarez was living the average life of an obscure and troubled man.
In filing the charges, Cooley said he was unmoved by Alvarez's emotional state before the crash.
The special circumstances could make Alvarez eligible for the death penalty if he is convicted, but Cooley said he hadn't yet decided whether to pursue the capital charges.
He left his car there and instead of killing himself, he killed many innocent people."
"This whole incident was started by a deranged individual that was suicidal," Adams said.
Fire officials said 123 people were treated and transported to 13 area hospitals.
Rescue workers arrived quickly and were aided by Costco employees who pulled injured passengers from the smoking wreckage.
The force of the crash hurled passengers down the aisles and into tables as the rail cars twisted and turned before finally coming to rest.
Some passengers had to be cut from the wreckage, which was strewn over a wide area, while others were forced to jump to safety from the burning upper decks of railway carriages that caught fire in the impact.
``This is unbelievably tragic,'' Sheriff Lee Baca told reporters at the scene.
At least one train car caught fire.
Ronald Watson came to the Glendale Police Station on Wednesday morning to find some information on his wife.
He is being held without bail at Los Angeles County/USC Medical Center jail ward, where he is being treated for the self-inflicted wounds.
He has an arrest record for cocaine, a turbulent relationship with his estranged wife and a restraining order to keep away from her and their two children.
Witnesses and survivors described a horrific collision that upended several double-decker rail cars and toppled a heavy diesel Union Pacific locomotive sitting idle on a side track.
Approximately 250 people were aboard the two commuter trains traveling in opposite directions at the beginning of the morning rush hour.
After the crash, the train ``appeared to be dragging whatever it hit.
"He was very distraught and upset and realized he caused a major disaster."
Late Tuesday evening or early Wednesday, Mr. Alvarez cut his arms and stabbed himself in the chest but the wounds were so superficial, he remained conscious.
His voice firm with anger, Cooley called Alvarez a self-centered man whose aborted suicide attempt on the Glendale railroad crossing led to 11 deaths in the early morning darkness Wednesday.
A man whom police described as deranged and bent on suicide abandoned a light truck on a heavily traveled commuter rail track here early Wednesday, causing a violent wreck involving three trains that left at least 10 people dead and nearly 200 injured.
At grade crossing, it would have been easier.
Wednesday's crash was the deadliest train accident in the United States since March 15, 1999, when an Amtrak train hit a truck and derailed near Bourbonnais, Ill., killing 11 people.
The cab car in the front of the southbound train has a reinforced frame that is designed to deflect or destroy vehicles parked at level grade crossings.
Two hours after the crash, the rain-spattered scene between a Costco store and a warehouse still reeked of diesel fuel.
Hundreds of firefighters descended on the scene within minutes of the 6:02 a.m. crash, dousing flames, spraying foam on the fuel spill and extricating wounded from the cars.
At least 89 people were rushed to hospital as a hundreds of rescuers and convoys of ambulances flooded the crash scene.
Mendevil, 25, was interviewed in the parking lot of the Costco store that became a command center and triage station for the crash.
We're all aware of Mr. Alvarez's background."
We knew we had a pretty traumatic situation."
A National Transportation Safety Board team was headed to the scene.
The National Transportation Safety Board has sent a team to investigate.
Federal investigators said they did not know the exact number of motorists who have committed suicides at rail crossings.
After the bodies had been cleared from the wreckage, law-enforcement officials began to wonder if Alvarez might have killed his family.
And we have no idea why he did this."
Investigators believe that Mr. Alvarez wanted to die under the wheels of the train, but when the end approached he reconsidered.
Alvarez appeared remorseful, sources said, making spontaneous statements about the crash to paramedics and law-enforcement officials who responded to the friend's 911 call.
Two other sheriff's deputies aboard the train were injured.
Glendale Mayor Bob Yousefian said that Alvarez ``kind of ran, tried to hide, but because of his previous injuries, he got apprehended.''
Alvarez's motive for wanting to kill himself, according to investigators, appears to be that his estranged wife, Carmelita, would not let him see their two children.
"He killed innocent people but not himself."
It was engulfing (one fourth of) the train.
But legal observers predicted Cooley will have a hard time getting a conviction on the special circumstances allegations because he would have to prove that Alvarez intended to kill people on the train.
A murder investigation was launched as the death toll rose following the horrific early morning crash involving three trains and a sports utility vehicle in the heavily-populated Los Angeles suburb of Glendale.
He said that Alvarez was cooperating with authorities and had acknowledged causing the wreck.
Fransen said she has taken the train regularly for 12 1/2 years and was in the aisle seat, second floor, middle car.
There was lots of smoke in the car.''
In April 2002, a freight train plowed into a stopped Metrolink train, leaving three passengers dead and 162 injured.
The car in front of us went sideways.
The 6 a.m. crash set off minor fires and diesel fuel spills as rescuers rushed to the scene about four miles north of Los Angeles.
Mr. Alvarez began to threaten suicide to friends, investigators said.
The National Transportation Safety Board and other government agencies sent investigators.
"When some individual parks his vehicle on the tracks that is cause for serious, serious alarm."
"One of the banes of our existence is we can't stop someone who wants to commit suicide."
We had seconds to think about what was going on,'' she said.
Two of Baca's employees died in the collision.
A counterterrorism command post was set up near the crash site, but authorities determined within an hour that the disaster was almost certainly the work of one troubled man.
After the body of an 11th victim was discovered, District Attorney Steve Cooley said another murder count would be added to the complaint.
Among the nine men and two women killed were a uniformed sheriff's deputy headed to work, several government employees and one of the conductors.
"The special circumstances alleged could lead to the death penalty but only after a careful evaluation of all the facts and circumstances that related to the particular incident.
Solow said that Metrolink and most other passenger trains were designed to withstand a collision with a light vehicle stopped at a grade crossing.
He said that Metrolink is involved in three to five grade crossing accidents a year, some involving attempted or successful suicides.
Shortly after 6 a.m., commuters were thrown flying through the cars and trapped beneath tons of twisted metal as the double-deck rail cars toppled and flames danced around them.
More than 120 people, dozens of them with serious injuries, were transported to 15 area hospitals.
As the diesel fuel dissipated at the crash site and the investigation became a clean-up operation, a clearer portrait of Alvarez emerged.
Hundreds of tons of wreckage from the commuter trains lay strewn across the area.
Mr. Alvarez, 25, has a history of drug arrests and violence.
Mrs. Alvarez got an order of protection against him in December, forbidding him to see his children.
It's one of the banes of our existence."
The body of one man was burned so badly it has yet to be identified.
Mayor Bob Yousefian of Glendale called on federal transportation authorities to eliminate all grade crossings, which are responsible for scores of accidents and suicides each year around the country.
Attorneys also said statements made by Sheriff Lee Baca, Los Angeles Mayor James Hahn and others that Alvarez was "deranged" and a "crazed individual" will not help defense attorneys in a possible insanity defense to spare him a potential death sentence.
The suspect was put on a suicide watch.
A bicycle lay on its side and the gravel rail bed was stained with oil and blood.
Thank God nothing serious happened to her.
Firefighters went through the wreckage five times with dogs and listening devices before determining that all the passengers had been accounted for.
"We want to make sure we do a very thorough job."
The store provided food and water for the hundreds of fire and rescue crews and media workers who descended on the crash site in the damp gloomy dawn.
Officials said the trains usually carried 200 to 250 passengers.
The tracks run next to a big-box shopping center anchored by a Costco, where triage was set up and store workers helped with the rescue.
Rescuers used extrication tools to cut out those trapped in the wreckage and shopping carts from Costco to wheel victims to triage until more gurneys arrived.
Even before a massive emergency response effort was launched, nearby residents and workers rushed to help passengers, many of them dazed and bleeding as they stumbled from the wreckage.
An hour after the crash, crews worked on the wreckage as about 50 passengers waited nearby.
He said investigators would also look at the extent of destruction in the commuter cars and what might be done to improve chances for survival in future accidents.
"A few other times he went around as if he wanted to kill himself."
They said the abortive suicide attempt did not involve terrorism.
He has been in and out of rehabilitation facilities over the years.
Slowed by his knife wounds, he was arrested quickly, police said.
``I'm angry that someone would be so selfish and would destroy the lives of so many people,'' Leah Gillen said.
Mayor James K. Hahn of Los Angeles called for a complete re-examination of all commuter rail lines to see if further safety measures were needed or possible after the freakish outcome to the bungled suicide.
Alvarez is in jail and under suicide watch, he added.
``There was a violent lurch and everything came to a stop.''
Alvarez, 25, was being held in a special custody ward at an area hospital.
Arnold Schwarzenegger sent his own condolences and those of his wife, Maria Shriver, to the victims and survivors.
More than once, his wife said in papers filed with the court, he threatened to kidnap the couple's children; a girl, 6 and a boy, 2.
Alvarez may also face federal charges in the train derailment.
He threatened to sell his Jeep to buy a gun, promising Mrs. Alvarez's brother, Ruben Ochoa, that he would be the primary target of his anger, she said.
David Morrison, 47, an attorney, was heading to downtown Los Angeles on his regular morning commute.
They treated and transported 123 victims, including 70 in critical condition.
As grieving friends and families mourned the deaths of their loved ones, city, state and federal investigators continued to comb through the massive pile of debris and twisted metal at the scene.
A fire broke out, and 5,000 gallons of diesel fuel spilled.
More than 300 firefighters combed through the derailed trains looking for trapped passengers in the predawn darkness.
"Nothing of this magnitude has happened (before) in Glendale," he said.
At least five passes had been completed through the trains by 9 a.m., when officials said the focus shifted from rescue to recovery.
About 40,000 people ride the double-decker trains every day, officials said.
Costco workers attended to the injured and used carts that usually haul plywood to carry the injured to ambulances when paramedics ran out of gurneys.
"All emergency personnel working through these tough times are not only trying to get victims reunited with their loved ones, but at the back of their minds know they have fellow employees who were injured or died.
Right in here, we usually pass another train.
"We're not doing our standard investigation which would involve determination of cause," said Paul Schlamm, a spokesman for the agency in Washington .
They assessed and released 60 others at the scene.
"The people who ride trains to Los Angeles deserve better than this.
A man standing outside the family's home, who described himself as a relative, said Mrs. Alvarez and the children were uninjured.
The police who investigate rail accidents are taught to look for signs of suicide, such as an absence of skid marks immediately before the crossing, indicating that the motorist saw the train and tried to stop.
In a light drizzle, rescue workers paused to salute the flag-draped stretcher carrying the body of Deputy James Tutino as it was removed from the wreckage.
"When paramedics responded, that's how we became aware of his location."
She's going to be mad I didn't pick her up."
The two trains that crashed on Wednesday typically carry between 230 and 300 people on weekdays.
He and other law enforcement officials expressed dismay and anger at what they called a preventable man-made disaster.
"Words can't describe, when you look into the cars, the violence of the crash," Mayor James Hahn said at a news conference.
"That an individual would deliberately put their car on tracks, cause a train derailment, affect the lives of hundreds of people and, in effect, kill people, this is a tragedy we will certainly mourn."
Glendale Mayor Bob Yousefian urged the federal government to provide funding to enhance grade crossings, while expressing shock and sadness at the tragedy.
"They said he was not well enough to appear today.
Wednesday's crash was the third fatal accident involving Metrolink in the past three years.
Mendevil said that although he was "pretty much in panic," he pried open a door and helped a woman out and away from the train.
``You don't put your car on the track and put yourself in harm's way and all these passengers in harm's way,'' Baca said.
"This whole incident started by a deranged individual who was suicidal," Adams said.
In the deadliest train wreck in recent years, an Amtrak train plunged off a railroad bridge near Mobile, Ala., in September 1993, killing 47 people.
Two were listed in critical condition, including Theresa Gillen.
Seven people remained in critical condition on Thursday.
The tracks were covered with tons of twisted metal and littered with rail car seats, suitcases, briefcases and clothing.
Dogs were brought in to search for survivors and cameras to probe dark crevices in the wreckage.
The entire wreck of all three trains was contained between a gray warehouse and the brick wall of a Costco warehouse store.
And we also want to thank the medical personnel who tended the injured."
"I heard what happened this morning, and I thought it can't be her," said Watson, visibly relieved.
Some 200 people, mostly walking wounded, were examined by medical staff at the scene as they prioritised treatment for the wounded, firefighters said.
Suicides more commonly involve pedestrians who walk in front of trains than those who park cars on the tracks, investigators say.
"We're taking a more limited role here."
Glendale Memorial Hospital treated 13 passengers.
"It's been an extremely long and difficult two days with the rescue and recovery of victims in this tragic accident," Glendale police Sgt.
He was wearing a tag around his neck given to him by paramedics to keep track of the injured.
He said the safety board would review data from recording devices in the locomotives, including time, speed and the exact location of the cars' breaking up.
But, Mrs. Alvarez was tracked to a modest home in the north section of Compton.
She filed a restraining order against him two months ago, alleging that he was prone to drug-induced hysteria.
"If someone wants to commit suicide," Solow said, "I don't care if it's on a highway, a railroad or jumping off a bridge, none of us is going to stop that.
"It had to be the worst multicasualty incident I've been to," Los Angeles Fire Capt.
You just offer to help anyone you can."
By 10:30 a.m. the death count hit 10.
People were hurt, dripping with blood.
Adams described him as ``upset, remorseful but cooperative.''
Alvarez, who will be 26 on Feb. 26, had previous drug arrests, Adams said.
The top speed is 79 mph, although the trains were believed to be traveling at less than the maximum.
Chase of the Chase Law Group in Studio City to represent him.
The fierce collision at 6:02 a.m. left rail cars toppled and crushed like oversized toys and sparked immediate fears among Los Angeles-area police that the derailment was a terrorist act.
One injured man trapped in the wreckage scrawled a note in his own blood on a seat cushion, according to Rex Vilaubi, a Los Angeles Fire Department spokesman.
According to investigators, Alvarez is an itinerant laborer with no fixed address.
"Because this man was distressed, 11 people are dead from his selfishness," Cooley said.
"The train tilted sideways and the lights flickered and went out."
A federal study in 1996 showed that in this configuration, the front car is exposed, putting passengers at particular risk of injuries or death.
All along the ground, large metal pieces of the side of the train and gray upholstered seats were scattered like discarded food wrappers.
Dozens of paramedic trucks formed single-file lines to quickly load and carry the wounded to 16 area hospitals.
Saks said prosecutors might do better to charge Alvarez with "depraved heart" murder, the equivalent of second-degree murder, rather than more serious first-degree charges.
"They will spend the next few weeks looking at documenting different aspects of the event like the crash-worthiness of the (rail) cars and survivability issues like how people were injured and what might be done to protect them better," agency spokesman Paul Schlamm said.
Inside the store, passengers were processed by officials trying to account for everyone on board.
The Alvarez family retained attorney Eric A.
The rest of the two-story car carries passengers.
Hopefully, they will patch him up so we can get this case rolling."
The couple had separated three months ago, and she obtained a restraining order against Alvarez about two months ago, the police said.
On the train cars, windows gaped or were shattered in their frames.
"It's a miracle that more people didn't die."
According to police records, Alvarez has a previous arrest history, possibly involving drugs.
``I'm sorry, I'm sorry,'' he muttered as he walked around the crash site, authorities said.
Most of the injuries suffered by victims were "crush-type" wounds similar to those that occur in car crashes, said Carol Meyer of the Los Angeles County emergency medical services.
A crash in Graniteville, S.C., earlier this month ruptured a chlorine tank, leaving nine people dead and 234 injured.
"It was unbelievable -- all you could think was, 'Go in and get those people out,' " said firefighter Oscar Stokes, 38.
The Los Angeles Police Department declared a citywide tactical alert that allows commanders to keep officers on the job beyond the end of their shifts, in order to help with the rescue and crowd control operations.
James E. Blatt, a high-profile criminal defense attorney based in Encino, said it seemed obvious that Alvarez was mentally ill and disabled, but that there was a much higher standard concerning an insanity defense.
Chase and fellow attorney Debra S. White said they expect Alvarez's arraignment, originally scheduled for Thursday, to be held Friday.
I held on for what seemed like a week and a half, it seemed.
Three LAPD employees were hospitalized, and one was unaccounted for, Bratton said.
"It suggests to me that he didn't have an intent to kill," said Elyn Saks, a professor of law, psychology and psychiatry in behavioral sciences at the University of Southern California School of Law.
Doug Parsons of Northridge also was aboard the train, headed for his job at the Metropolitan Water District downtown.
Solow said there's little Metrolink can do to prevent suicide attempts on its tracks.
Increasingly, his behavior became more odd and paranoid, his wife said in court papers, and she said he accused her of participating in pornographic videos.
Cathie Fransen, 57, was riding with her friend Ken Milds, 55, in the middle car.
The train had numerous cars full of gravel and was preparing to go to Santa Barbara to repair tracks damaged in the recent California rainstorms.
Firefighters described a horrific scene where bloodied passengers were helping each other off the train and responders could hear the cries for help.
"And next thing I knew the train tilted, everyone was screaming and I held onto a pole for dear life.
Heavy equipment was then brought in to begin to clear the tracks, a process that will take several days, officials said.
Tracy West of Northridge, who suffered serious cuts to her right leg, described a nightmarish scene:
As firefighters cleared each car, they marked the side, giving the cars an eerie look as they formed a twisted zig-zag pattern next to the tracks.
He said the passengers fled amid the smell of diesel fumes.
Further information was not available.
Many of the patients had head, chest and abdominal injuries, she added.
And at first blush, he appears to understand the consequences of his actions."
Once done, the commuters filed out and sat on white picnic benches in front of a snack stand.
David Solow, the chief executive officer of Metrolink, described how the disaster unfolded.
"It sounded like thunder," said Karen Mendoza, an employee at a nearby wholesale store who called emergency services when she heard the accident.
Employees took fire extinguishers from the store shelves and ran outside to help.
It got louder and louder," Diane Brady, 56, a passenger from Simi Valley, told the Associated Press.
"People just flew out of their seats and hit the walls," said Bernan Castro, a Washington Mutual insurance agent who had boarded the southbound train in Burbank.
Metrolink is a commuter rail system serving five counties in Southern California since its formation in 1992.