The shooting was first reported by the Corpus Christi Caller-Times.
He was in the intensive care unit at Christus Spohn Health System and listed in stable condition yesterday evening.
He was being treated in the intensive care unit at a Corpus Christi hospital.
Whittington was in stable condition in the intensive care unit at Christus Spohn Hospital Memorial, were he was treated for wounds to his shoulder, upper body, chest and neck, said hospital spokeswoman Michele Mora-Trevino.
Cheney's spokeswoman, Lea Anne McBride, said the vice president was with Whittington and his wife at the hospital on Sunday.
Whittington, 78, was "alert and doing fine" in the hospital, Katharine Armstrong, owner of the Armstrong Ranch in south Texas, was quoted by CNN as saying.
Cheney was using a 28-gauge shotgun and was about 30 yards away from Whittington, she said.
McClellan and the Corpus Christi Caller-Times provided the following timeline:
8 p.m. EST -- Deputy White House Chief of Staff Karl Rove updates Bush, telling the president that Cheney was the shooter.
McClellan said President Bush learned there had been a hunting accident from White House Chief of Staff Andrew Card about 7:30 p.m. EST Saturday and learned that Cheney had been the shooter shortly before 8 p.m. EST when updated by Deputy White House Chief of Staff Karl Rove.
The victim was described as being "peppered pretty good" with birdshot and was in stable condition Sunday.
Whittington has long been active in Republican Party politics and was appointed by then-Governor George W. Bush to the Texas Funeral Service Commission.
Vice President Dick Cheney accidentally shot and wounded a companion during a weekend quail hunting trip in Texas, spraying the fellow hunter in the face and chest with shotgun pellets.
U.S. Vice President Dick Cheney accidentally shot and injured a hunting companion in Texas over the weekend, U.S. media reported Sunday.
US Vice President Dick Cheney did not have a legal permit to hunt quail when he accidentally shot a 78-year old hunting partner over the weekend, the White House said on Monday.
The vice president's office did not publicly report the accident until mid-afternoon Sunday after the Corpus Christi Caller-Times had asked about it.
Cheney's staff did not publicly confirm the accidental shooting until 3:30 p.m. EST on Sunday, more than 20 hours after the accident, when the Corpus Christi Caller-Times posted a story on its Web site.
"The investigation reveals that there was no alcohol, or misconduct involved in the incident," the Kenedy County sheriff's office said in a statement.
And, by God, Harry was in the line of fire and got peppered pretty good."
And by god, Harry was in the line of fire and got peppered pretty good."
McClellan said he had urged speedy public disclosure following the incident at the 50,000-acre Armstrong Ranch some 60 miles outside Corpus Christi, Texas.
Armstrong said she was watching from a car while Cheney, Whittington and another hunter got out of the vehicle to shoot at a covey of quail.
McClellan said spoke with Katharine Armstrong, one of the ranch owners and an eyewitness to the accident, and she agreed to relay word of the accident to the local newspaper on Sunday.
Armstrong has said that Whittington came up noiselessly behind the vice president, who spun around to target a bird and shot his fellow hunter instead.
It was at dusk that Whittington shot his bird and went to retrieve it, taking him behind the vice president.
She said that Whittington shot a quail and went to look for it in the grass.
Whittington shot a bird and went to look for it in the tall grass, while Cheney and the third hunter walked to another spot and discovered a second covey.
7:30 p.m. EST -- White House Chief of Staff Andrew Card in Washington alerts Bush at the White House about an unspecified shooting accident within Cheney's quail hunting party but does not specify that Cheney was the shooter.
3:30 p.m. EST -- News organizations confirm the Corpus Christi Caller-Times account with vice president's office at the White House.
Armstrong spoke to the local newspaper, the Corpus Christi Caller-Times, which had called her after getting a tip.
Harry Whittington, Cheney's hunting companion during a quail hunting trip in Texas on Saturday, was mostly injured on his right side, with shotgun pellets hitting his cheek, neck and chest, the reports said.
WASHINGTON - Vice President Dick Cheney accidentally shot a hunting partner Saturday in Texas, and the White House did not confirm the shooting until nearly 20 hours later.
The Texas Parks and Wildlife Department informed Cheney that he lacked a stamp for hunting "upland game birds" in the state when the shooting incident occurred, the vice president's office said in a statement.
There is no requirement to report nonfatal hunting accidents in Texas, said Lydia Saldana, the communications director for the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department.
She was appointed to the Texas Parks and Wildlife Commission in 1999 by Bush, who was then the Texas governor.
Whittington was moved out of the intensive care unit at a hospital here Monday and reported to be in good spirits.
"He remains in stable condition in our ICU (intensive care unit)," Michele Mora-Trevino, a spokeswoman for Christus Spohn Hospital Memorial in Corpus Christi, Texas told AFP.
He was described as in stable condition by Yvonne Wheeler, spokeswoman for the Christus Spohn Health System in Corpus Christi.
Armstrong, owner of the Armstrong Ranch where the accident occurred, said Whittington was bleeding and Cheney was very apologetic.
"I think you can always look back at these issues and look at how to do a better job," mused McClellan, who said he had advocated full disclosure and left little doubt that he would have handled the situation differently.
She was an eyewitness, she saw what occurred and she called her local paper to provide those facts," said McClellan.
Cheney and Armstrong "agreed that she should make that information public.
Unfortunately, these types of hunting accidents do happen from time to time," the spokesman told a frequently contentious briefing with reporters.
Bush knew an hour after the fact that a hunting accident had taken place at 5:30 pm (2330 GMT), and it took him another 30 minutes to find out that Cheney had pulled the trigger, said McClellan.
The man accidentally shot by US Vice President Dick Cheney while the two were hunting on a southern Texas ranch is in stable condition, a hospital spokeswoman said Monday.
"I'm not going to speculate," the daily quoted her as saying.
PICK UP 5th graf: According to Armstrong's xxx
And Bush spokesman Scott McClellan battled criticism over the decision by Cheney's office to let Armstrong -- a private citizen with no official White House role -- make the news public by informing her local newspaper.
There was still no official account of the events on Katherine Armstrong's south-Texas ranch on Saturday, when Cheney missed his quail quarry but hit prominent lawyer Harry Whittington in the neck and chest with birdshot.
Whittington was treated on the scene by Cheney's traveling medical detail before being taken by helicopter to a Corpus Christi hospital.
Asked why getting Whittington medical attention was incompatible with releasing details of the incident, McClellan said that the vice president's office had "worked to get that information out."
"He's in good health, he's doing well," Mora-Trevino said, adding that a release date had not yet been set for the prominent Texas lawyer.
Whittington is a longtime friend of President Bush from their days together in Austin when Bush was Texas governor.
McClellan also said that details about the shooting were trickling in throughout the night and that the White House needed "to get the facts together."
Late-night talk show hosts, who typically mine such incidents for laughs, were not broadcasting over the weekend, making Monday night the first time they will be able to train their sights on the mishap.
Whittington was bleeding, but he was not very seriously injured, she said.
Gaming officials said they had been issuing oral warnings instead of fines to hunters who had failed to update their licenses under the new rule.
Said Jeff Hart, an Austin lawyer who hunts for quail in Texas: ``If you pull the trigger, you're responsible for it, no matter what.
``You're hunting together -- you need to know where everyone is,'' said Larry Keane, general counsel of the National Shooting Sports Foundation.
But hunting experts said that, although Whittington should have made his location clear, the vice president is also to blame for not keeping track of his companions.
``And so, you know, unfortunately these type of hunting accidents happen from time to time.''
``The protocol was not followed by Mr. Whittington when it came to notifying the others that he was there,'' McClellan said.
Still, McClellan blamed Whittington for the accident, noting that the attorney left the hunt line to retrieve a downed quail and was approaching Cheney from behind.
And I think that's where everybody's attention should have been focused, and was focused, when the hunting accident took place.''
White House press secretary Scott McClellan said Monday that the ``first priority was making sure that Harry Whittington ... was getting the medical care that he needed.
And it has forced a White House already under fire for secrecy to explain why it made no mention of the shooting until the ranch owner disclosed it to a local newspaper, 18 hours after the incident.
But the incident has reverberated worldwide: ``Cheney bags a lawyer,'' was the headline in the Glasgow, Scotland-based Herald.
In a statement Monday night, Cheney's office said his staffers had not known about the stamp requirement and that Cheney had sent a $7 check to Texas to cover the cost.
The incident made the front pages of The Washington Post, The New York Times, USA Today and The Wall Street Journal, most of which noted soberly that Cheney's office had not gone public with the information when it happened.
The stamp is a new requirement, and the department has issued verbal warnings to many hunters who were unaware they needed it.
Cheney, an experienced outdoorsman who had a valid out-of-state hunting license, will receive a warning citation for failing to purchase the required $7 stamp for bird hunting, the Texas Department of Parks and Wildlife said in a statement.
McClellan also said that details about the shooting were trickling in throughout the night and that the White House needed "to get the facts together."
Late-night talk show hosts, who typically mine such incidents for laughs, were not broadcasting over the weekend, making Monday night the first time they will be able to train their sights on the mishap.
The incident made the front pages of The Washington Post, The New York Times, USA Today and The Wall Street Journal, most of which noted soberly that Cheney's office had not gone public with the information when it happened.
"When you put the call into me, I was able to confirm that account."
"I'm not going to speculate," the daily quoted her as saying.
Asked why getting Whittington medical attention was incompatible with releasing details of the incident, McClellan said that the vice president's office had "worked to get that information out."
Unfortunately, these types of hunting accidents do happen from time to time," the spokesman told a frequently contentious briefing with reporters.
You now, I've been peppered pretty well myself," said Armstrong.
Cheney aides continued to decline requests for an official timeline and details of the incident, pointing reporters to Armstrong's account and vouching for its accuracy.
Associated Press writer Paul Weber in Dallas contributed to this report.
He also travels frequently to Arkansas to hunt ducks.
"This is something that happens from time to time.
She said Whittington is a regular, too, but she thought it was the first time the two men hunted together.
Tobin Armstrong was quoted by the Associated Press as saying in 2000 that he frequently went hunting on the ranch with Cheney, who turned 65 last month.
Cheney's hunting trips have included one with Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia, who went duck hunting in January 2004 with the vice president in Louisiana, a trip criticized because Scalia participates in decisions that affect the administration.
McBride said Cheney has a Texas hunting license.
Bush, who owns a ranch in Texas, and Cheney, who grew up in Wyoming, are both enthusiastic hunters, a fact they have frequently mentioned during political campaigns.
His team treated Whittington before he was taken to the hospital.
Cheney, who suffered four heart attacks before he was elected vice president and has been hospitalized for heart problems while in office, always travels with a medical team.
After the hospital visit, McBride said Cheney "was pleased to see that he was doing fine and in good spirits."
Armstrong did not return a call seeking comment on McBride's statement.
McBride said Armstrong talked to "her local paper and when we were asked about the account she had provided, [we] confirmed that."
White House spokeswoman Lea Anne McBride, asked in a telephone interview why the shooting was not announced sooner, referred questions to Katharine Armstrong.
The White House confirmed the shooting after being contacted by the media.
It didn't get in his eyes or anything like that."
"It broke the skin," Armstrong said, referring to the birdshot.
The vice president visited Whittington in the hospital Sunday, Armstrong said.
An incident report by the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department said that Whittington had gone to retrieve a downed bird when Cheney wheeled around with his 28-gauge Perazzi shotgun and shot him by accident.
The weather was sunny and "clear" when the accident occurred and both men were wearing blaze orange hats and vests, the report said.
Tobin Armstrong was a major financial backer of the Bush-Cheney team who died last October, with Cheney attending the funeral.
The covey flushed and the vice president picked out a bird and was following it and shot.
"The vice president didn't see him.
The Dallas Morning News reported that Whittington also lacked the proper stamp for hunting quail.
Both men were wearing orange vests.
Anne Armstrong, a former counselor to President Nixon, has served on the board of the Halliburton Corp., where Cheney was chief executive before becoming vice president.
Cheney then went to search for more quail.
When Armstrong died in October, his funeral was attended by Cheney and former President George H. W. Bush.
"Tobin is one of our dearest and most respected friends," former President Bush said.
"Barbara and I loved Tobin Armstrong."
"The covey flushed and the vice president picked out a bird and was following it and shot.
Armstrong said Cheney is a longtime friend who comes to the ranch to hunt about once a year and is "a very safe sportsman."
He was described in an article published two weeks ago in the Austin-American Statesman as being "very rich, very stubborn, and very patient."
Cheney is an avid hunter who makes annual hunting trips to South Dakota to hunt pheasants.
"The vice president has got an ambulance on call, so the ambulance came."
"Fortunately, the vice president has got a lot of medical people around him and so they were right there and probably more cautious than we would have been," she said.
It didn't get in his eyes or anything like that."
"It broke the skin," she said of the shotgun pellets.
Whittington owns property in Travis County, which includes the state capital Austin, worth at least $11 million, the Austin American-Statesman reported last year, not counting a downtown block at the center of a long-running dispute with the city over a condemnation issue.
He has been appointed to several state boards, including when then-Gov.
``It's news, and it reflects an attitude in this White House of holding back information, of being too clever by half and being secretive,'' conservative columnist Robert Novak said on Fox News.
"The vice president didn't see him," she continued.
The accident happened in south Texas at the famed Armstrong Ranch, co-owned by members of a family long close to Cheney.
Cheney shot Harry Whittington, 78, a multimillionaire Austin lawyer, spraying his friend and hunting partner with shotgun pellets from head to chest.
Whittington, bloodied but still conscious, tumbled to the ground after he was hit.
She said emergency personnel traveling with Cheney tended to Whittington until the ambulance arrived.
An interview with Whittington had confirmed Cheney's account, the sheriff's office said.
Cheney is a longtime hunter and delivered the keynote address in 2004 to the National Rifle Association, from which he accepted a rifle as a gift.
The Houston Chronicle has reported that there were 29 hunting-related accidents in Texas in 2004, with four fatalities.
But, my fellow sportsmen, this coverup isn't going to work because you and I know the Second Amendment is more than just another photo opportunity."
"My personal opinion was his camo jacket was an October disguise.
"He wore a brand new camouflage jacket for the occasion, which makes you wonder just how often he does really go goose hunting," Cheney said, according to a White House transcript.
In the final stages of the 2004 campaign, Cheney mocked the way Democratic presidential nominee Senator John F. Kerry went on a hunting trip.
Cheney, well-known for having testy relations with the media, on Monday came under criticism from Democrats and Republicans who said the White House should have disclosed the incident immediately.
In hunting, the shooter is responsible for knowing where the shot is going.
``On the face of it, this looks like something the administration felt the public had no right to know,'' Joe Lockhart, who was President Clinton's press secretary, said in an interview.
Her lobbying clients include several that do business with the federal government, though Armstrong said she did not believe that she had ever lobbied Cheney.
"But you could say it's closed," Salinas said of the case.
The sheriff said Sunday that they had yet to speak to "the victim."
He said Sanmiguel interviewed the Cheney and reported that shooting was an accident.
Salinas said he sent his chief deputy, Gilbert Sanmiguel, to the Armstrong ranch that night.
The local sheriff, Ramon Salinas 3rd, said the Secret Service called him shortly after the shooting occurred.
Texas authorities said they would issue a warning citation to Cheney but impose no penalty or fine for failing to have the seven-dollar stamp.
McClellan struggled at times to explain even the most basic details in the case, including when and how Bush was informed about it.
The incident provided a wealth of material for Democrats, gun control activists and critics of the Bush administration, not to mention late night comedians.
It was later picked up by national wire services and confirmed by Cheney's office.
On Sunday morning, Armstrong tipped off her local newspaper to the story.
She said Cheney participated in discussions on Sunday morning about disclosing the incident, agreeing that it should be made public but deferring to the Armstrong family on how to do so.
In an interview, Armstrong said that it did not occur to anyone in the hunting party to make news of the shooting public immediately, but that no one, including Cheney, had called for holding it back.
The pressure came in part from questions about whether Cheney might have been trying to play down the incident, a suggestion that was rejected by those who were with Cheney over the weekend.
Armstrong did not immediately return a telephone call seeking additional comment.
But Scott McClellan, the White House press secretary, was battered at his daily news briefing by journalists demanding answers to why Cheney had not been faster to make public what happened and why he had chosen a local newspaper in Texas as his vehicle for doing so.
At the end of a meeting with U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan, Cheney and Bush exchanged remarks that reporters were about to enter the room, and the vice president left before the journalists arrived.
At the White House, Cheney made no statement and remained out of public view on Monday.
The local sheriff said an investigation had concluded that the episode was "no more than an accident."
Texas officials said on Monday night that Cheney would be issued a warning citation for hunting without a proper game stamp on his license.
Calls to his room were routed to the hospital's marketing department, which said it was taking messages for him.
``I don't think there's going to be a bunch of people sitting around saying: `I wonder why they waited to tell us.'
His condition remained listed as stable, with wounds to his face, neck, chest and rib cage from the pellets sprayed at him from 30 yards away by Cheney's shotgun.
The revelation was sure to aggravate a public relations headache for the White House, already under criticism for waiting a day to disclose the shooting incident.
The White House sought with little success on Monday to quell an uproar over why it took the better part of a day to disclose that Vice President Dick Cheney had accidentally wounded a fellow hunter in Texas on Saturday and why even President Bush initially got an incomplete report on the shooting.
(Stewart M. Powell can be reached at 202-263-6400 or at the e-mail address (stewart@hearstdc.com)
"If you drop out of line, you say you are coming up behind to indicate to other shooters so (they) know you are there."
On Monday, a news release from the sheriff's office said that " Whittington's interview collaborated Vice President Cheney's statement" and that the department was "fully satisfied that this was no more than a hunting accident."
In a statement on Monday night, Cheney's office said a member of his staff had asked the Parks and Wildlife Department for all of the necessary permits for the vice president to go quail hunting in Texas and had paid $140.
But, the statement said, the staff member was not informed of the need for an additional stamp, costing $7, to allow hunting of upland game birds.
The statement said Cheney has now sent a $7 check to the department.
Willeford and her husband are substantial Republican donors; they gave more than $11,000 to Republican causes, including the Bush campaign and the Republican National Committee, in the 2004 election cycle.
"Harry should have let us know he was back there."
"He understands that he could have handled it better," Willeford said.
Willeford, whose husband was also at the ranch, said in an interview that Whittington accepted responsibility for the accident.
"There was some bleeding, but it wasn't horrible," she said.
She said she ran over to Whittington, who had fallen to the ground, but stayed out of the way while Secret Service agents tended to him.
Cheney, who was carrying a 28-gauge shotgun, had already begun to fire and sprayed Whittington.
According to Armstrong and Willeford, the accident was largely the fault of Whittington, who reappeared alongside two of his hunting companions without giving proper warning.
I don't believe I've ever lobbied the vice president, nor would I be comfortable doing so."
Asked if she was concerned that Cheney's visit could create the appearance of impropriety during the lobbying investigation involving Jack Abramoff, which has brought to light the often close personal and professional ties between lobbyists and public officials, she said: "Oh my God, he's a friend.
She none were involved in Iraq "that I know of."
Armstrong said she does more public relations and consulting work than lobbying, but she declined to disclose her clients.
"I represent a couple of Texas companies, not a large lobbying practice," she said.
"You need to understand that the Cheneys are our friends maybe for a couple of decades, maybe 30 years," Armstrong said, adding that she did not personally represent Parsons.
Armstrong played down her role as a lobbyist and suggested that she had not brought up business during Cheney's visit.
Records in Texas indicate that she has lobbied at the state level for three companies: Avex Group, the Dannenbaum Engineering Corporation and Ecocreto USA.
Public records show that she has worked for Baker Botts, the law firm; Prionics AG, a biotechnology company; Trajen, a firm that performs aviation technical support for the U.S. military; and the King ranch, the property next to her family's ranch.
Armstrong has a relatively limited list of lobbying clients in Texas and in Washington.
Johnson also lobbies for major corporations, including Lockheed Martin, and has been one of Bush's leading fund-raisers.
Armstrong's business partner, Karen Johnson, spent several years lobbying for Parsons, doing work on "business development" before the State Department, the Department of Transportation and the U.S. Agency for International Development, according to PoliticalMoneyLine, which tracks federal lobbying.
According to public documents, Armstrong registered in 2004 as a lobbyist for Parsons, an engineering and construction firm that has done extensive work in Iraq, and listed the size of the contract at more than $100,000, according to lobbying records from the Texas Ethics Commission provided by Texans for Public Justice, a watchdog group.
She was with Cheney at the time of the shooting, as was Armstrong, whose mother, Anne, is a prominent Republican supporter and whose family ranch is a familiar destination for Republican politicians.
This past weekend brought Cheney together with a group of old friends, friends of friends and political supporters in the kind of private setting he relishes.
During the 2004 presidential campaign, Cheney mocked Sen. John Kerry, the Democratic nominee, for having worn camouflage on a duck-hunting trip, saying Kerry's "new camo jacket is an October disguise, an effort he's making to hide the fact that he votes against gun-owner rights at every turn."
Cheney has often gone hunting as vice president, sometimes with other prominent officials, including Justice Antonin Scalia.
"The reason that you stay in line is so that you know where everybody is at all times," Armstrong told the newspaper.
Cheney's staff members had asked state authorities for all necessary permits beforehand and were never informed about the need for a seven-dollar stamp for quail hunting, his office said in its statement.
He ducks from his limousine into the White House wearing a black jacket with the collar raised against the early morning chill.
``He's a true Southern gentleman,'' Binko said of Whittington at a Monday news conference.
McClellan attributed some of the delay to Cheney's aides trying to "get the facts together (to) provide that information to the public" as well as making sure that Cheney's victim, 78-year-old Texas lawyer Harry Whittington, had adequate medical attention.
"Of course in a position like mine, I was urging that that information be made available as quickly as possible."
"I think it's always important to get information out as quickly as possible," McClellan said.
The White House on Monday carefully distanced itself from Vice President Dick Cheney's delayed notification about his accidental shooting of a hunting companion.
Times staff writers Lianne Hart in Corpus Christi and Peter Wallsten in Washington contributed to this report.
Riccardi reported from Corpus Christi and Gerstenzang from Washington.
The dispute is still being litigated.
He's best known nowadays for a decades-long battle to prevent the city of Austin from building a parking lot over a downtown block that he owns.
Whittington is a fixture in Texas politics, having worked in Republican campaigns dating back to John Tower's senatorial run in the 1960s.
``He's really amazed, I think, at all the hoopla over this.''
Peter Binko, administrator of Christos Spohn hospital in Corpus Christi where Whittington was recuperating, said the injured hunter was cracking jokes -- and was baffled by all the publicity.
"It was the vice president's office that took the lead on this," he said, when asked about whether he had been told that Cheney's staff was relying on a private citizen to report the accident.
The vice president urged her to tell friends and family first, before word leaked out to the media.
``We knew word would get out,'' she said.
Anne Armstrong said that on Saturday evening, Cheney spoke with her about disclosing the incident to the public.
When asked whether the Secret Service had prevented him from talking to the vice president right after the shooting, San Miguel said: ``I'd rather not say.''
It was evident that the injuries were not life-threatening, Armstrong said, because the ambulance paused on the road for several minutes to allow Whittington's wife to join them.
They packed the wounded attorney into Cheney's ambulance and drove him to a nearby hospital.
The medical team that travels with Cheney immediately began ministering to Whittington, who was bleeding profusely from pellets in his face, neck and chest, according to witnesses.
Cheney, Whittington and Pamela Willeford, a former Texas energy executive who is now the U.S. ambassador to Switzerland, went with two of Armstrong's daughters and pursued quail for several more hours.
Then they broke for a lunch of antelope, jicama salad and camp bread, washed down with Dr Pepper.
The party of 11 hunters set out in two trucks Saturday morning, driving around the mesquite-dotted property and shooting quail until about 12:30 p.m., said Anne Armstrong, co-owner of the ranch.
But McClellan sought to deflect criticism about the slow disclosure by suggesting that Cheney's staff was responsible.
White House Press Secretary McClellan said he had privately urged Cheney's staff to quickly disclose details about the 5:30 p.m. CST accident on Saturday rather than wait for the Texas ranch owner to telephone the local newspaper more than 18 hours later, on Sunday.
He says he began urging vice presidential staff to release details of the incident.
McClellan, drawing a distinction with the response by Cheney's staff, told reporters Monday: "I think you can always look back at these issues and look at how to do a better job."
Monday morning -- Cheney arrives at the White House complex in his motorcade, with escorting police vehicles forgoing the usual sirens.
Sunday afternoon -- Cheney visits Whittington at the Corpus Christi hospital before returning to Washington, D.C.
Sunday morning -- Cheney talks by telephone with Merce Whittington, Whittington's wife, to check on the victim's condition.
Asked whether it was appropriate to have a private citizen relay information about the vice president, McClellan quipped: "That's one way to provide information to the public."
"The vice president spoke with (Katharine Armstrong) directly and agreed that she should make it public and that they would provide additional information," McClellan said.
Ambassador to Britain Anne Armstrong, ask Cheney about notifying the news media.
Cheney shot prominent lawyer Harry Whittington in the neck and chest with birdshot on Saturday as the two were out quail hunting on a Texas ranch.
5:30 p.m. CST -- Cheney accidentally shoots Whittington.
OPTIONAL TRIM -- STORY MAY END HERE
But what they will be saying is: `I wonder what else they're not telling us.'
McClellan immediately disclosed that Bush had suffered "mild to moderate" scrapes on his arms and hands that required bandages by the White House physician.
McClellan contrasted the delayed notification by a private citizen with his own quick actions last July when he notified the news media that Bush had collided with a member of his Scottish security detail while bicycling in Scotland during an international summit.
The Caller-Times also reported Monday that the US ambassador to Switzerland and Liechtenstein, Pamela Willeford, was part of the hunting party.
The guests included Pamela Pitzer Willeford, a Texan who was appointed ambassador to Switzerland and Liechtenstein in 2003.
The Corpus Christi Caller-Times reported Monday that Cheney and Whittington had been hunting with Pam Willeford, the U.S. ambassador to Switzerland and Liechtenstein who had served for eight years on the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board.
The Secret Service reported the shooting to the Kenedy County sheriff's office, although no one from that agency interviewed Cheney until Sunday morning.
``This was a hunting accident,'' said Gilbert San Miguel, chief deputy of the Kenedy County Sheriff's office.
McClellan as well as Cheney spokeswoman Lea Anne McBride insisted that the time gap between the incident and its confirmation by the White House was due to a focus on getting Whittington the medical care he needed.
President George W. Bush's spokesman Scott McClellan as well as Cheney spokeswoman Lea Anne McBride insisted that the delay between the incident and its confirmation by the White House was due to a focus on securing Whittington medical care.
Among the people with him at the Armstrong Ranch in south Texas was his host Katharine Armstrong, a lobbyist and longtime friend of Cheney.
The shooting occurred late Saturday afternoon while Cheney was hunting with Harry Whittington, 78, a prominent Austin lawyer, on the Armstrong Ranch in south Texas.
Whittington "came up from behind the vice president and the other hunter and didn't signal them or indicate to them or announce himself," Armstrong said.
Whittington shot a bird and was looking for it in the tall grass, while Cheney and the third hunter walked to another spot and found a second covey, Armstrong said.
Katharine Armstrong starts trying to telephone Jaime Powell, a reporter at the Corpus Christi Caller Times, to describe the accident.
In the end, White House officials said Bush learned about the shooting accident at 7:30 p.m. Eastern time, about an hour after it happened, in a call from Andrew H. Card Jr., his chief of staff.
After being stabilized at the hospital in Kingsville, Whittington was evacuated by helicopter to a larger facility in Corpus Christi -- where he was placed in the intensive care unit.
Whittington's condition was improving and described as "stable" by doctors at Christus Spohn Hospital Memorial, where he was treated for wounds to his shoulder, upper body, chest and neck.
Whittington, an Austin lawyer, was listed Monday in "very stable" condition at Christus Spohn Hospital Memorial in Corpus Christi, Texas, where he was undergoing treatment for multiple pellet wounds on the right side of his lower face, neck, shoulder and chest.
"He got peppered pretty good," Armstrong said.
She said Cheney didn't see Whittington, and when he chose a bird to shoot, he accidentally hit Whittington, who was "in the in the line of fire."
Hearing a covey of birds, Cheney shot at one, not realizing that Whittington had startled the quail and that he was in the line of fire.
Cheney thought he was shooting at a covey of quail, according to an owner of the ranch.
The 50,000-acre Armstrong Ranch was purchased in 1852 by Tobin Armstrong's grandfather, John Armstrong III, who became known for capturing outlaw John Wesley Hardin, according to a profile of the ranch in the Caller-Times.
Whittington -- a prominent Austin attorney -- and the vice president arrived for a weekend hunting trip Friday night at the 50,000-acre Armstrong ranch, a well-known retreat for wealthy Texas Republicans 95 miles south of Corpus Christi.
The Associated Press quoted Katharine Armstrong, one of the ranch owners, as saying she watched the shooting from her vantage in a nearby car.
The accident occurred Saturday when the vice president wheeled to shoot at a covey of quail and accidentally sprayed his hunting partner, 78-year-old attorney Harry Whittington, with bird shot, authorities said.
Sunday morning -- Katharine Armstrong, the host and an eyewitness to the accident, says she and her mother, former U.S.
Armstrong in an interview with The Associated Press said Whittington, 78, was mostly injured on his right side, with the pellets hitting his cheek, neck and chest during the incident which occurred late afternoon on Saturday
Armstrong said Whittington was injured mostly on his right side, from cheek to chest.
Vice President Dick Cheney accidentally sprayed a companion with birdshot while hunting quail on a private Texas ranch, injuring the man in the face, neck and chest, the vice president's office confirmed yesterday after a Texas newspaper reported the incident.
Whittington was about 30 yards away when he was hit in the cheek, neck and chest, she said.
Katharine Armstrong, the ranch's owner, saw what happened Saturday and told reporters Sunday that Cheney was using a 28-gauge shotgun, which shoots fewer pellets and has a smaller shot pattern than a 12-gauge shotgun, making hitting the target more challenging.
Cheney, 65, was using a .28 gauge shotgun when he accidentally peppered Whittington with bird shot at a distance of about 30 yards while trying to shoot flushed quail.
While awaiting a warning from game wardens, "the Vice President has sent a 7 dollar check to the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, which is the cost of an upland game bird stamp," it said.
Whittington has been a private practice attorney in Austin since 1950 and has long been active in Texas Republican politics.
George W. Bush named him to the Texas Funeral Service Commission.
The vice president's office did not disclose the accident until nearly 24 hours after it happened.
Late Sunday morning, her daughter, Katharine Armstrong, called a reporter from the Corpus Christi Caller, which then reported the shooting on its Web site.
The news first came to light on Sunday at 1:48 pm (1948 GMT), when the Corpus Christi Caller-Times published Armstrong's account on its Internet site.
She told the Corpus Christi Caller Times that Whittington had come up behind Cheney without alerting him that he was here.
But the Caller-Times reported Monday that McBride, after confirming the incident around noon (1800 GMT) on Sunday, had refused to say whether the vice president's office would have disclosed the incident if the daily had not contacted her after getting a tip from an unnamed Armstrong family member.
But the Caller-Times reported Monday that McBride, after confirming the incident around noon (1800 GMT) on Sunday, had refused to say whether the vice president's office would have disclosed the incident if the daily had not contacted her after getting a tip from an unnamed Armstrong family member.
The shooting occurred about 5:30 p.m. local time Saturday and was first reported on the website of the Corpus Christi Caller-Times at midday Sunday, according to a reporter at the newspaper.
Cheney was very apologetic, she added.
Harry Whittington, 78, was peppered with shotgun pellets after Cheney turned to shoot quail that had just been flushed out of the brush, Cheney spokeswoman Lea Anne McBride confirmed Sunday.
Cheney spent time with Whittington, a lawyer from Austin, and his wife at the hospital on Sunday, CNN said.
``There was no alcohol or misconduct.''
Harry Whittington, a millionaire attorney from Austin, was "alert and doing fine" in a Corpus Christi hospital Sunday, a day after he was shot by Cheney on a ranch in south Texas, said Katharine Armstrong, the property's owner.
He is flown by helicopter to a hospital in Corpus Christi and admitted to the trauma-intensive care unit.
"The area affected was his shoulder, upper body, chest and some of the neck area," she said.
Whittington was admitted at 8:15 pm on Saturday following the accident and remained in the intensive care unit on Monday morning.
He was taken by medical helicopter to the Christus Spohn Health System in Corpus Christi, about an hour away.
Cheney was described as apologetic for shooting Whittington.
Cheney was described as apologetic for shooting Whittington.
Whittington "came up from behind the vice president and the other hunter and didn't signal them or indicate to them or announce himself," Armstrong told the Associated Press.
Confirming Armstrong's account, local police and state game officials said the vice president had spun around to target a bird and shot his fellow hunter instead.
6 a.m. EST -- McClellan is awakened at home and told that Cheney was the shooter.
But Bush did not find out that Cheney was the shooter until about half an hour later in a subsequent call from Karl Rove, his senior adviser and deputy chief of staff, who had called Armstrong to ask about the incident.
McClellan said he was informed late Saturday night that there had been a hunting accident but didn't learn that Cheney had shot the victim until 6 a.m. EST Sunday.
Although he broke no laws, Vice President Dick Cheney did not have proper hunting credentials when he accidentally shot a fellow hunter at a private ranch last weekend, authorities said Monday.
The White House drew fire Monday for not immediately disclosing that Vice President Dick Cheney had shot a 78-year-old hunting partner in a weekend incident not reported until a day after it took place.
Breaking with precedent, the White House did not disclose the information to the national media that cover Bush and Cheney.
News of the shooting was first revealed not by the White House but by the owner of the south-Texas ranch, Katharine Armstrong, where the incident took place.
The victim, Harry Whittington, a 78-year-old lawyer, was transferred from the intensive care unit to a private room in a Corpus Christi hospital on Monday.
Hospital administrator Peter Banko said Whittington was moved out of intensive care on Monday.