President of the Lower Manhattan Development Corp.
Chairman and chief executive of the Bank of New York Co.
Chairman of the Lower Manhattan Development Corp.
Retired chairman and chief executive of GreenPoint Financial Corp. Father of Scott Johnson, who died in the south tower.
Chairman and chief executive of Tishman Speyer Properties.
Chairman and chief executive of American Express.
Chairman and chief executive of the American International Group.
Chairman and chief executive of Fiduciary Trust.
Chairman and chief executive of Time Warner.
William B. Harrison Jr. Chairman and chief executive of J.P. Morgan Chase & Co.
Chief executive of the Walt Disney Co.
Pataki said former Presidents Gerald R. Ford, Jimmy Carter, George H.W.
New York Governor George Pataki said Monday that Gerald Ford, Jimmy Carter, George H.W.
George E. Pataki and Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg were able Wednesday to name 31 members of the board of the World Trade Center Memorial Foundation.
Bush and Bill Clinton had all pledged their support for the World Trade Center Memorial Foundation and would serve as honorary members of the board of directors.
Bush and Bill Clinton were all named honorary members.
Bush and Bill Clinton would serve as honorary members of the memorial foundation, which will raise money for the memorial and the cultural centers.
Founding partner of Kohlberg Kravis Roberts, an investment firm.
Speyer, the chairman and chief executive of Tishman Speyer Properties, whose portfolio includes Rockefeller Center and the Chrysler Building, agreed to serve on the board that he would not lead.
Bush, Jimmy Carter and Gerald R. Ford -- would be honorary members.
Former US presidents Gerald Ford, Jimmy Carter, George H.W.
One of the working members will be Brian Mulroney, a former prime minister of Canada, whose presence symbolizes the international importance of the memorial, said Kevin M. Rampe, president of the development corporation and a foundation board member.
Founder of 9/11 Families for America.
Member of the memorial jury, vice chairwoman of the International Freedom Center.
The members announced Wednesday are:
"I wanted to be helpful but, frankly, it was a matter of time," he said Wednesday.
Co-chairman of Brookfield Properties Corp., which owns the World Financial Center.
1 and 9 trains, with sufficient covering over the tunnel to satisfy Metropolitan Transportation Authority standards.
Conceivably, then, the foundation may start its $500 million campaign with several hundred million dollars already available.
Though the foundation will not formally begin raising money until next year, Bloomberg all but made the second big pledge as he stood at the lectern in the lobby of the American Express headquarters in the World Financial Center at Battery Park City.
It will also own and operate the buildings.
"And that's really exactly what is called for because there isn't a more noble task before us."
"You probably won't find a board of any higher caliber anywhere in the city," said Bloomberg, who knows a thing or two about philanthropy.
Until Wednesday afternoon, even the designated members did not know whom all their colleagues would be.
Sister of Charles Burlingame, captain of American Airlines Flight 77, which hit the Pentagon.
The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, which owns the site and will build the streets, said that height would permit the installation of as many utility lines as are needed within the roadbed, directly above the subway tunnel for the Nos.
E. John Rosenwald Jr. Vice chairman of Bear, Stearns & Co.
Here, the surface would be 2 feet higher than at Fulton Street to the north and 6 feet higher than at Liberty Street to the south.
The bump -- really, more of a hump -- would occur in Greenwich Street at Dey Street.
At stake in these negotiations are elements as important as the whole east side of the memorial, which may depend on what may seem like arcane questions of roadway layout.
President emerita of the Museum of Modern Art.
Vice president of the September 11th Families Association, which is organizing the Tribute Visitors Center at ground zero.
Father of Jonathan Lee Ielpi, a firefighter who died at the trade center.
But new challenges are unfolding, largely out of sight, as planners struggle to reconcile an architectural vision with the physical realities of a complex site.
After months of searching and one awkward false start last spring when two prospective co-chairmen, Jerry I. Speyer and Sanford I. Weill, backed away from the job, Gov.
Senior partner at the law firm Weil, Gotshal & Manges.
To the public, the tough part of designing the memorial may seem to have passed last year with the choice of a concept, the twin voids of "Reflecting Absence," and the selection of architects: Michael Arad, Peter Walker & Partners and Davis Brody Bond.
The memorial board also included retired New York firefighter Lee Ielpi and Monica Iken, whose husband was killed in the trade center attack.
But it could profoundly affect a visitor's experience by creating the need for a wall running more than 200 feet along the Greenwich Street side of the memorial, marking an abrupt grade change between plaza level and sidewalk.
One of the founders of Families of September 11.
Father of Jean Roger, flight attendant on the hijacked American Airlines Flight 11, which hit the north tower.
Between this wall and the museum complex at Fulton Street and a stairway at Liberty Street, there would be only two small areas where one could walk straight into the memorial from Greenwich Street, the approach most visitors will probably take.
Over the past months, the design team, with associate architect Max Bond, embarked on the schematic design process to develop the physical and programmatic elements of the memorial.
The task of raising half a billion dollars to build a World Trade Center memorial, a museum building and a performing arts center will fall to a foundation made up of captains of finance and real estate, cultural leaders, media heavyweights and seven relatives of those killed on 9/11.
A three-foot-thick concrete liner will be built to reinforce the slurry wall around the trade center foundations.
Excavation of 18,000 cubic yards of bedrock for the column footings will begin in February, he said.
For instance, he outlined the early construction schedule of the Freedom Tower.
-- but long on smaller yet vital details.
where will an extra $3 billion come from to build a train tunnel from downtown to Long Island?
what is the status of the West Street bypass?
In the governor's fourth progress report on Lower Manhattan, to 420 guests of the Association for a Better New York at the Ritz-Carlton New York in Battery Park City, he was short on big news -- when will the damaged Fiterman Hall be razed?
J. Max Bond Jr., a partner in Davis Brody Bond who accompanied Pataki at ground zero Monday, said, "Of course we're pleased, if somewhat apprehensive, since the stakes are so high and the projects are important and demanding."
And Pataki announced that the underground memorial interpretive center, where artifacts and exhibits will tell the story of the trade center and the 2001 and 1993 attacks, will be designed by the Manhattan firm Davis Brody Bond, which is already associated with Michael Arad and Peter Walker on the memorial itself; the Norwegian firm Snohetta, which is working on the museum complex at the trade center site; and Howard-Revis Design of Washington, which specializes in designing exhibits.
He also called for an overall spending plan by March, since demands downtown far exceed the available grants.
In describing the memorial -- "Picture the old foundations of the Louvre in France or the catacombs at the Vatican" -- Pataki said the column remnants of the twin towers would be kept visible, "laying bare the very roots of the towers as visitors absorb the meaning of what took place here."
George E. Pataki offered a preview of the completed design, which he said will be ready next month.
Having been eclipsed for most of this year by other issues at ground zero, the World Trade Center memorial returned to the forefront Monday as Gov.
"I am looking forward to the day when I will be privileged to set foot and walk down those ramps to the bedrock and, like the family members, bend over and pay my tribute in an appropriate memorial," Gov.
On this level, the north tower's foundations will be exposed in a chamber more than 60 feet high.
Forty feet below, within inches of bedrock itself, unidentified remains will be entombed.
The pools will be centered within, but slightly smaller than, the tower outlines.
Here, both pool-filled voids marking the absent towers will be visible through cascading curtains of water, each ringed with the names of the dead.
Beginning on a plaza forested with some 300 oak trees and a one-and-a-half-acre open area that can double as a civic gathering place for as many as 10,000 people, visitors will make their way down two switchback ramps, each as long as a city block, that will take them 30 feet below ground into the central memorial hall.
Severed during the clearing of ground zero, many steel and concrete column footings that still outline the perimeters of the twin towers will be made part of the memorial itself, as will a 70-foot-tall, 250-foot-long section of the original slurry wall.
By April, steel and concrete will arrive.
Later in 2005, he said, the floor slabs and tower columns of the skyscraper will start to rise.
The memorial, which will commemorate the nearly 3,000 victims of the Sept.11 terror attacks and the 1993 bombing, is expected to be completed by 2009.
Next month, Pataki said, construction is to begin on the new South Ferry subway station and on two stations that are part of the planned Fulton Street Transit Center on Broadway.
However, it would also mean that Greenwich Street would rise almost 5 feet higher than the memorial plaza.
In January, 2004, a 13-member jury selected "Reflecting Absence " by Michael Arad and Peter Walker as the design for the WTC memorial.
"We want to show, to make clear, what a great loss we all suffered. "
"The primary responsibility that we have is to those who lost so much on that terrible day," said memorial designer Michael Arad.
The new schematic design features a vast landscaped civic plaza, cascading voids with deeply recessed pools and an area for those lost but never identified.
He said the memorial will help tell the story of Sept. 11 and the lost lives, so that future generations will understand the enormity of what happened here.
Pataki praised designers for creating a fitting memorial to those who lost their lives at the WTC site.
"We have to have a memorial that really allows us to connect the sheer enormity of the Twin Towers, to the individuals that were taken from us," said Bloomberg.
The families of some rescue workers wanted their loved ones listed separately, though police officers, firefighters and paramedics will be identifiable by the insignia of their respective agencies.
The updated design will not include any changes to the random listing of the victims' names.
The architectural team designing the World Trade Center (WTC) memorial presented an update on its plans Thursday afternoon.
Ford, 91, had been unable to attend the event.
The memorial is scheduled to open in 2009.
The pools are to sit almost empty, with water running down the sides only, symbolizing the vacuum left by the 2,749 people who died when two hijacked planes were crashed into the trade center's twin towers.
"Reflecting Absence" by architect Michael Arad, which features two reflecting pools surrounded by gardens, was chosen from 5,201 entries submitted to an international design competition.
"The memorial will be the centerpiece and our first priority in the rebuilding effort," Pataki said at a luncheon event in New York City.
All four living former US presidents have agreed to become honorary directors of the project for a permanent memorial to the victims of the September 11, 2001 attack on the World Trade Center.
After his speech, Pataki visited the 21st floor of the Deutsche Bank building and then the muddy pit of ground zero, where outlines of the column remnants of 1 World Trade Center have been exposed.
Also next month, he said, deconstruction will begin on the damaged, shrouded 40-story Deutsche Bank building across Liberty Street from the trade center site.
The slope would allow water drainage and prevent puddling in the street.
The World Trade Center memorial will preserve not only the memory of those who died on Sept. 11, 2001, but the remnants -- visible and even tangible -- of the buildings that died that morning, too.
There is not room enough to accommodate a stairway at this location because the footprint of the south tower -- an immovable element in the equation -- is too close to the sidewalk.
Nancy Burroughs, sister of victim Stephen Knapp, said "a lot of lessons could have been learned from that bombing that might have made a difference on 9/11."
The board could choose to operate more openly.
"There is no law that requires that the board must be open," said Ira M. Millstein, a senior partner in the law firm Weil, Gotshal & Manges, who is counsel to the development corporation board and one of the foundation's directors.
But it does not have to let the public listen in.
It may also "purchase, lease, receive, own, sell and convey real and personal property of all kinds."
(A devise is a gift of real property by will.)
It may "solicit, accept, hold, invest, reinvest and administer any gifts, bequests, devises, benefits of trusts and property of any sort, without limitation as to amount or value, and to use, disburse or donate the principal or income."
The foundation has a lot of power to do these jobs.
That is a lot of responsibility, with many implications for the way the public will experience the memorial, the interpretive memorial center and the museums and the theaters, since the foundation is also charged with "encouraging the development of cultural facilities as part of the redevelopment of the World Trade Center site."
But the foundation was given a broader range of powers in its April 2003 certificate of incorporation, beginning with its purpose: "To own, construct, operate and maintain a memorial and related structures and appurtenances on the site of the World Trade Center."
(With about $3.5 million now in hand, $496.5 million is still to be raised.)
"All levels of gifts -- from $1 to $100 million -- will be sought and accepted," said its September 2003 application for tax-exempt status under section 501(c)3 of the internal revenue code.
Indeed, the foundation will be a fund-raising organization.
On the face of it, it sounds like a genteel, cup-in-hand group that will solicit charitable contributions that the development corporation, a state agency, cannot.
The impact of this shift has not received much attention, perhaps because the very name "Foundation" understates the new body's role and potential clout.
Officials have long complimented themselves -- sometimes with good reason -- on the openness and transparency of planning efforts at the trade center site.
The truth is that the two-hour meeting was closed to the public and the news media, since the foundation is a private corporation.
Images and sound bites convey a false sense of accessibility, however.
Because the board includes Robert De Niro and Barbara Walters, there were many cameras and microphones to capture that moment in the Winter Garden of the World Financial Center, overlooking ground zero.
The World Trade Center Memorial Foundation board met Wednesday for the first time before emerging for an introduction to the site by the architects Daniel Libeskind and Michael Arad.
Don't look now -- actually, you can't look now -- but a great deal of decision-making about the public realm at the new World Trade Center may disappear from public view behind closed boardroom doors.
George Pataki said the world has "a sacred duty to remember" and Mayor Michael Bloomberg said the new memorial "will speak to generations of New Yorkers of our duty to remain relentlessly vigilant."
And the plaza cannot be canted upward to meet Greenwich Street because the voids will have walls of cascading water within, which must be kept absolutely level.
At a memorial Mass in nearby St. Peter's Church, the Rev.
"This is a decision for the board to make," Millstein said.
"It's very difficult to have a hair-down discussion with everyone watching.
On the other hand, we want to be completely transparent."
The principals typically stay for this question-and-answer session, even though they are sometimes put on the spot.
The memorial is scheduled to open in 2009.
The pools are to sit almost empty, with water running down the sides only, symbolizing the vacuum left by the 2,749 people who died when two hijacked planes were crashed into the trade center's twin towers.
"Reflecting Absence" by architect Michael Arad, which features two reflecting pools surrounded by gardens, was chosen from 5,201 entries submitted to an international memorial design competition.
"That is why it is so important that when the new World Trade Center has been completed, we have a memorial that captures the depth of those attacks and preserves their full impact for future generations," he said.
"We can never forget the tragic events of September 11," New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg said in a statement.
Along with a slew of prominent business leaders, the list included actor Robert De Niro, veteran TV correspondent Barbara Walters and Canadian former prime minster Brian Mulroney.
A total of 31 people were named to the board of directors of the memorial foundation, a non-profit corporation that will construct, own, operate and maintain the memorial.
Four US ex-presidents, a Hollywood legend, a retired fireman and a star TV journalist were among those appointed Wednesday to lead the project for a memorial to the victims of the September 11, 2001 attack on the World Trade Center.
Kevin M. Rampe, the president of the development corporation and a foundation director, said, "The board clearly understands the public trust which they have undertaken and are committed to the same level of transparency as the LMDC."
Though they are tightly organized, with little freewheeling discussion, it is possible to see fissures within the board by paying attention to the questions, objections and exceptions that members register, even as they vote -- generally unanimously -- to adopt the items before them.
Reporters are given about 10 minutes after each meeting to ask questions of anyone on the board, particularly those who would otherwise be hard to reach.
Wednesday's session was largely procedural, according to those who were there.
The matter was not even on the agenda but the workers had a chance to make their grievance felt.
Last month, for instance, members of the Restaurant Opportunities Center of New York showed up to criticize the corporation for not helping finance a restaurant planned downtown to employ displaced workers from Windows on the World.
One can argue whether these quiet protests have any meaningful effect but the board can never adjourn under the impression that its policies are uniformly popular.
This means that citizens who show up to register their unhappiness with the corporation -- particularly for its failure to finance more job-creation and lower-income housing programs -- may be assured at least that their placards, banners and lapel buttons are being read by the people in charge.
For one, the principals almost always attend.
But several useful civic purposes are served.
True, almost all the substantive work goes on behind the scenes.
John C. Whitehead, the interim chairman, told board members that meeting minutes would be made public.
Walters, the one reporter in the room, raised the issue of openness.
Deputy Mayor Patricia E. Harris became the 33rd director and Jason R. Lilien was named counsel.
The other victims were John Di Giovanni, the "John" on the surviving fragment; Robert Kirkpatrick; Wilfredo Mercado; and Monica Rodriguez Smith.
Kevin Madigan said in his sermon that the 2001 attack "in no way eclipses" the losses of 1993, but makes them "all the more real, all the more personal."
Arad said his memorial will try "to make present what is absent" since the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attack that brought down the twin towers and other buildings.
For comparison's sake, the PATH station concourse is at elevation 276 feet, the mezzanine at 264 feet and the passenger platforms at 250 feet.
The meeting came on the same day that Gov.
Why not raise the entire plaza level a bit?
The 33-member board set up governance and executive committees before meeting Wednesday with trade center master planner Daniel Libeskind and memorial architect Michael Arad near the building site.
God is in the details, Mies van der Rohe is often quoted as saying.
Robert De Niro, Barbara Walters, David Rockefeller and other members of the foundation charged with raising money for a World Trade Center memorial held their first meeting.
The lowest point in the PATH system is midway in Tunnel E, the outbound route from the trade center to New Jersey, at elevation 212 feet.
The base of the trade center site is at elevation 243 feet.
How do you measure heights on a site with so many levels above and below ground?
Different data are used for different purposes.
On this scale, the high point on Greenwich Street is at elevation 316 feet, the memorial plaza at 311.2 feet.
Engineers typically rely on a datum, a constant plane from which elevations can be uniformly calculated.
But the corporation's alternative raises more questions.
The trade center datum is 2.653 feet above the old railroad datum.
Because the railroad datum was deliberately set very deep -- exactly 300 feet below mean sea level at Sandy Hook, N.J. -- all measurements from it can be expressed as positive elevations.
Where would utility lines go if they could not fit in a shallower Greenwich Street roadbed?
The World Trade Center Downtown Restoration Program datum is closely related to that of the Hudson & Manhattan Railroad, now PATH, which was integral to the development of the twin towers in the 1960s.
As engaging as last season's architectural beauty contests may have been, the real form of the future World Trade Center is being decided now.
George Pataki urged passage of an income tax checkoff that would allow New York taxpayers to donate to the memorial.
"The construction of Greenwich Street through the World Trade Center site is another of the complex engineering issues that must be carefully studied and resolved as we move forward with the redevelopment," said Kenneth J. Ringler Jr., the executive director of the Port Authority.
That would permit a level approach to the memorial at Dey Street.
Any slope in the plaza would be apparent around the perimeter of the voids.
"My father and these other five people were the first World Trade Center victims, and it's our duty to make sure they're not forgotten."
Not only would that wall block physical access but it would also diminish the designers' goal of direct sight lines into the plaza from the surrounding sidewalks.
"We have to remember that 9/11 began in 1993," said Michael Macko of New York City, son of victim William Macko.
As an alternative, the corporation has proposed lowering Greenwich Street by four feet.
And how appropriate is it for architecture to set street heights, rather than the other way around?
The rose-colored granite was part of a memorial fountain erected in 1995 to honor those killed on Feb. 26, 1993, when 1,200 pounds of explosives were detonated in a rented van in a parking garage under the towers.
In a ceremony above the gaping pit remaining from the Sept. 11, 2001, attack that destroyed the complex and the original memorial, an honor guard of Port Authority officers placed the fragment in a 9 1/2-foot-tall (2.9-meter-high) steel pylon shaped like one of the twin towers.
A fragment of granite bearing the name "John" _ all that remains of a memorial to the six people killed in the first terror attack on the World Trade Center _ was installed Saturday as the central piece of a new memorial.
Whitehead's agency was created to oversee redevelopment at and around the trade center site.
(Because of the changing topography around the site, stairways will still be needed to reach the plaza level from the sidewalks at the southeast, southwest and northwest corners.)
The memorial will include a forest of oak trees with a clearing for Sept. 11 gatherings and a Memorial Hall between the reflecting pools that will mark the footprints of the lost towers.
They have been given the task of raising $500 million (euro378 million) to build both a memorial to the victims of the 2001 and 1993 trade center attacks and adjoining cultural facilities.
"It's absolutely critical that we take the steps necessary to set the grade in a way that achieves the objective we all share of knitting the site back into the community, both physically and visually," Kevin M. Rampe, president of the development corporation, said Wednesday.
The World Trade Center Memorial Foundation's board also includes former Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney, Disney CEO Michael Eisner and several trade center victims' family members.
Co-founding partner of Welsh, Carson, Anderson & Stowe, a private investment firm.
Chairman and co-founder of the Blackstone Group, an investment firm.
Lower Manhattan Development Corp. Chairman John Whitehead last month called Memorial Hall a public space where visitors will be able to "review a directory of the names, locating their loved ones among the souls that are there."
The governor said that financing of the memorial should be the "first and most important" priority for the $816 million in federal grants that have yet to be allocated by the Lower Manhattan Development Corp.
Assistant vice president for family relations at the Lower Manhattan Development Corp.
Kevin M. Rampe, the president of the Lower Manhattan Development Corp., which is overseeing the memorial, described the new elements as "simple acts, knitted together to create a powerful memorial at the heart of the World Trade Center site."
The first big pledge may be said to have come last week, when Pataki declared in a speech that the highest priority for the remaining $816 million in unallocated federal grants controlled by the Lower Manhattan Development Corp. should be "to guarantee that we have the funds necessary to build the memorial."
President of the Carnegie Corp. of New York.
The working members of the board are to be named next week by the governor and Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg.
Governor George Pataki and Mayor Michael Bloomberg joined the team of architects to present a more detailed description of what visitors will experience at the memorial and the surrounding plaza.
Carter, Bush and Clinton were all together just last week, when they attended the dedication of Clinton's presidential library.
The mission of the nonprofit foundation is to oversee and coordinate fund-raising and construction of the memorial and the cultural buildings at the trade center site.
Founder of September's Mission, a foundation that supports the development of a memorial park at ground zero, and the wife of Michael Iken, who died in the south tower.
Sister of John Katsimatides, who died in the north tower.
Wife of David S. Berry, who died in the south tower.
Pataki had already said that four former presidents -- Bill Clinton, George H.W.
"At the heart of the rebuilding is the creation of a lasting memorial which will honor the memories of those we lost and help tell their story to the world," said New York Governor George Pataki.
The Lower Manhattan Development Corp. maintains a virtual library of important planning documents on its Web site, www.renewnyc.com, and opens its monthly board meetings to the public and the press.
But the future may hold opacity, or at least translucence, as the nonprofit foundation assumes more of the role that the Lower Manhattan Development Corp. has performed until now.
If Greenwich Street must rise that high, the Lower Manhattan Development Corp. has concluded that a wall will be needed along much of the adjacent part of the memorial.
John C. Whitehead, the chairman of the Lower Manhattan Development Corp., will head the foundation until the board members have a chance to meet next month and select a chairman.
"As the mayor of New York and also as a citizen of New York," he said, "I plan to do my part to ensure these projects reach their full potential."
Visitors will be able to touch the jagged steel and the rough concrete.
On Thursday, almost a year after the world saw the earliest renderings of the plan called "Reflecting Absence," three architects guided their listeners -- the governor of New York and the mayor of New York City among them -- on a trip through the schematic design, showing in more detail the spaces that will compose the memorial when it opens in 2009.
The roster seems to reflect some geopolitical ticket-splitting, with the chairmen of giant downtown companies like American Express, American International Group and the Bank of New York balanced by Robert Wood Johnson IV, the owner of the New York Jets, who hopes to build a new football stadium on the far West Side.
Heading the list of boldface names, in one arena or another, are Robert DeNiro, who has been a presence in the nearby TriBeCa area for many years; Barbara Walters of ABC; David Rockefeller, who was deeply involved in the original development of the World Trade Center; and Michael D. Eisner, the chief executive of the Walt Disney Co.