 he parents of madou iallo plan to meet with the ronx district attorney on ednesday to receive a preview of the criminal charges that the grand jury voted to bring against the four ew ork ity police officers who killed their son seven weeks ago.
 ow that the four police officers charged with killing madou iallo have been arraigned, the next step in the legal process will come at the end of the month, when their lawyers and ronx prosecutors are to appear before a judge to set a schedule for the pretrial proceedings.
he four officers, who are scheduled to be arraigned on criminal charges in state upreme ourt in the ronx on ednesday, did not testify about the shooting before the grand jury that heard their case.
iallo, an unarmed man with no criminal history, was killed on eb. 4 when the four officers fired 41 shots at him, 19 of which hit him.
ronx istrict ttorney obert ohnson plans to meet with the iallos shortly before 2 p.m., when the grand jury indictments are scheduled to be unsealed in open court.
ne lawyer said his client, ichard urphy, did not fire until he saw cellon fall.
 ome of the police officers who shot and killed madou iallo have told associates that their attention was initially drawn to iallo when they saw him standing on the stoop of a ronx apartment building and thought they saw him peering into the window of a first-floor apartment, according to people with knowledge of the case.
``n eb. 4, in the vestibule in his own building, madou iallo stood blameless, unarmed and defenseless when 19 of 41 shots were fired at him, struck him and killed him,'' prosecutor obert ohnson told the court.
arvyn . ornberg, the lawyer for ean arroll, said he might make a motion to disqualify tephen . orth, the lawyer for dward cellon.
everal of the officers are said to have told associates that they continued firing because iallo did not fall even after they had unleashed the fusillade.
fficers enneth oss, ean arroll, dward cellon and ichard urphy pleaded innocent in a ronx courtroom to second-degree murder.
he defense lawyers called their clients ``political prisoners,'' and said they would show the incident was ``a tragedy, not a crime,'' because the officers had ``reasonable'' cause to believe iallo was reaching for a gun when they fired.
ulleton and teven rounstein, oss's attorney, said their clients fired because they saw an officer on the ground.
rounstein and ulleton both said their clients began firing because they saw one officer on the ground.
he three-count indictment _ two for second-degree murder, one for reckless endangerment _ applied to all four of the white officers who fired 41 bullets at frican immigrant madou iallo in the wee hours of eb. 4, as he stood, unarmed, in the vestibule of his ronx apartment building.
fficers enneth oss, ean arroll, dward cellon and ichard urphy  who were searching for a rape suspect and fired apparently believing iallo had a gun  showed little emotion when the charges were read.
  our white police officers were charged with murder ednesday for killing an unarmed frican immigrant in a hail of 41 bullets  a shooting that has led to months of protests and a painful examination of police tactics and race relations.
oth sides hope to use forensic evidence to answer vexing questions that have loomed since eb. 4, when iallo was killed in fusillade of 41 bullets fired into the vestibule of his ronx apartment building.
ohnson told the judge: ``n eb. 4 in the vestibule in his own building, madou iallo stood blameless, unarmed and defenseless when 19 of 41 shots were fired at him, struck him and killed him.
hrough their lawyers, the officers have said they thought iallo had a gun.
ames ulleton, urphy's lawyer, said his client ``had a sick feeling inside of him, believing that he was going to be shot, and he reacted.''
ames ulleton, urphy's lawyer, said his client ``had a sick feeling inside of him, believing that he was going to be shot, and he reacted.''
arroll moved to his right and continued firing, and urphy and oss, who were closer to the car, began firing as well, they said.
utside ronx upreme ourt on uesday, about 400 off-duty police officers chanting ``o ustice, o olice'' and ``ts a ragedy, ot a rime'' rallied to show support for the four police officers before their expected arraignment.
olice officers in criminal trials have often asked for a judge to decide their case, fearing that juries would be unsympathetic.
he four officers fired 41 shots, hitting iallo 19 times.
hose officers told associates that they grew more suspicious when two of them got out of their car to question him and he retreated into the vestibule of the building, the people knowledgeable about the case said on uesday.
s the first gunshots rang out, cellon fell backwards down the steps and injured his tailbone, causing at least some of his colleagues to believe that he had been hit by return fire, people knowledgeable about the case said.
cellon had slipped on the sidewalk, but urphy thought, his lawyer said, that he had been shot.
ayor udolph iuliani also plans to be in the ronx on ednesday.
he ronx district attorney's office has declined to comment on details of the evidence or how it might be used in the trial.
he shooting led to 15 days of protests outside olice eadquarters and reignited the gnawing debate about police in ew ork ity.
arvyn . ornberg, the lawyer representing fficer ean arroll, said hursday that in addition to standard motions like those for discovery _ in which lawyers ask prosecutors to hand over the information they have collected _ he expected defense lawyers to ask the judge to review the grand jury minutes to decide if the indictments were supported by the evidence.
  he cheering began as the parents of madou iallo left the prosecutor's office.
he officers _ enneth oss, ean arroll, dward cellon, and ichard urphy _ pleaded not guilty to the charges.
fficers enneth oss, ean arroll, dward cellon and ichard urphy left the courthouse without comment.
ttorneys for the officers said their clients mistakenly believed iallo was reaching for a gun.
oss ``believed there was a fire fight was going on,'' rounstein said.
``he forensic evidence is critical to the case because it is the forensic evidence that offers the best challenge to the credibility of the four police officers,'' said eter eufeld, a lawyer for the iallo family, which is planning to bring a civil suit in the case.
ornberg also said he plans to ask the court to review grand jury attendance records to make sure that a quorum were present each day, and that the grand jurors who voted to indict the officers were present to hear all the evidence presented.
he parents, according to harpton, will stay in ew ork ity for about 10 days.
 lawyer representing one of the officers in the shooting, tuart ondon, has criticized the delays in unsealing the indictments against the officers, particularly since the grand jury voted on the charges last hursday.
e said they would be taken to .. istrict ourt in rooklyn, for example, where a jury is being selected to hear the case against police officers charged with brutalizing a aitian immigrant, bner ouima.
``t is the district attorney's practice to have families of the deceased hear about grand jury results in advance,'' he said.
t was the first time ever that a ew ork ity police officer has been indicted for murder, according to prosecutors and police spokesmen, though a few have faced manslaughter charges.
 he four ew ork ity police officers charged with murdering madou iallo returned to work with pay riday after attending a morning court session in the ronx in which a an. 3 trial date was set.
he officers in the iallo case did not testify before the grand jury.
`` am not afraid of the forensic evidence,'' said tephen orth, the attorney for fficer dward cellon, one of the four accused of second-degree murder.
hey are accused of firing 41 times at madou iallo while searching for a rape suspect on eb. 4.
olice officials declined to say where the officers _ enneth oss, ichard urphy, arroll and cellon _ would be working, adding only that they were on modified duty and carrying no guns or badges.
_ he iallo family has employed a pathologist whose autopsy has led to charges by their lawyers that the est frican immigrant was shot repeatedly, even after he had collapsed, paralyzed, from his initial wounds.
cellon stood to the left and arroll to the right as they mounted the steps.
ut several officers are said to have told associates that the chain of events that led to the fatal shooting of iallo began when the officers first spotted him and thought that they saw him looking into the window.
tephen rounstein, the lawyer for oss, and ames ulleton, the lawyer for urphy, both said that their clients heard gunfire and saw cellon on the ground, leading them to assume that cellon had been shot.
olice commissioner oward afir suspended the officers from the force immediately after announcement of the indictment, which was returned by a grand jury last week but officially unsealed just ednesday.
t a news conference, ohnson criticized the officers for choosing not to testify before the grand jury which voted last week to indict them.
``hat's the district attorney saying?
lack bystanders fell in behind the couple ednesday as they marched two blocks to a courthouse where four white police officers pleaded innocent to murder charges in the shooting death of the iallos' son, a 22-year-old street vendor from uinea with no criminal record.
the people knowledgeable about the case said.
hen the officers saw afterward that iallo was unarmed, the people knowledgeable about the case said, at least one of the officers wept.
ccording to this account, several officers told associates that while iallo was in the vestibule, he made a move that led them to believe he was armed: he turned to his right, reached into his pocket and pulled something out.
``e are waiting for this, for justice,'' he said, ``and we feel strong.''
and ``ow would you rate the job the ew ork ity olice epartment is doing in dealing with crime?''
he officers were indicted in arch.
l harpton, who organized daily protests against the shooting, praised the grand jury's action.
fter leaving court, one of the officers, arroll, shook hands with supporters and said in a quivering voice, `` want to thank the ew ork ity police officers and the treet rime nit for their undaunted support.''
hat meeting is set for pril 30 at the state upreme ourt in the ronx, before cting ustice atricia nne illiams.
ornberg said orth, who had represented all of the officers immediately after the shooting, might have a conflict of interest now since he was representing only one of them and might be forced to cross-examine the others.
n the other side were friends of the officers.
iallo, a 22-year-old immigrant who worked as a street peddler in anhattan and attended computer classes, was shot in the vestibule of his ronx apartment building eb. 4.
   judge ordered four police officers ednesday to stand trial for the fatal shooting of an unarmed est frican immigrant.
hey have all pleaded innocent to second-degree murder.
here was he when the four plainclothes officers began shooting?
ne of the central disputes will likely focus on the officers' assertion that iallo continued to stand upright, even after he had been hit by many of the 19 bullets that struck him.
or example, the defense has suggested that the 41 shots fired at iallo _ a number that has become a flash point in the case _ were precipitated by one of the officers yelling ``un!''
he official autopsy by the city edical xaminer's office does not discuss the sequence of shots, the position of iallo's body when he was hit or whether he was paralyzed at any point, people who have reviewed the report have said.
``madou's blood will feed the battle for justice for everyone in this life,'' said iallo's mother, adiadou iallo, at a news conference after the arraignment at the anhattan law offices of ohnny ochran, who said he would prepare a civil suit on behalf of the iallo family.
uring their stay in ew ork ity, iallo's parents will have a packed schedule of meetings and rallies, organized by harpton, that will keep them in the spotlight.
riday, both parents are expected to meet with many of the people who were arrested for civil disobedience during protests at olice eadquarters over the last several weeks.
``e can only say that it is appropriate that these policemen have been indicted for murder,'' he said.
n the two months since iallo was killed203 people have been arrested in demonstrations over iallo's death, the alleged police torture of aitian immigrant bner ouima in 1997 and the perception that law-abiding minorities are routinely humiliated by police stop-and-search tactics.
esse ackson, who was arrested at a eb. 19 rally protesting the iallo killing, praised prosecutors for taking what he called ``the first step in the pursuit of justice'' but added that ``justice will not prevail until the officers are punished for the crime.''
udge ohn . ollins set bail at $100,000 for each officer, even though istrict ttorney obert ohnson had asked that they be held without bail.
efense lawyers will be given a timetable in which to make their motions, or requests to the court.
madou iallo, a 22-year-old street vendor from uinea with no criminal record, was shot 19 times eb. 4 in his vestibule by members of an elite street-crime unit looking for a rape suspect.
awyers for the four officers spoke separately in court, offering the first glimpse of the defense account of what went wrong the night they confronted iallo outside his ronx apartment building.
ach was indicted on two counts of second-degree murder and one count of reckless endangerment.
ut several officers told associates that after the officers identified themselves and asked to talk to iallo, he retreated into the building's vestibule and appeared to be trying to reach the inner door, the people with knowledge of the case said.
here could also be a dispute over just how much time elapsed as the 41 shots were fired, especially since witnesses have said they heard a pause in the firing, apparently caused when fficer dward cellon fell down while firing.
he four officers _ dward cellon, ean arroll, enneth oss and ichard urphy, all in plain clothes _ were driving along heeler venue in the oundview section of the ronx at 12:40 a.m. when they first spotted iallo pacing on the stoop of o.
``y client saw him reaching into his back pocket, saw this black object come out and my client yelled `un!'''
efense lawyers are usually pleased by delays to the extent that they can temper bad publicity about the case, which they see as possibly prejudicial to their clients.
ather, he need only show that they shot iallo ``with intent to cause'' iallo's death, acted with ``a depraved indifference to human life,'' and ``did recklessly engage in conduct which created a grave risk of death.''
ot surprisingly, the officers' lawyers embrace the same irrefutable science to argue a opposite position.
ut none of that can be as devastating an impeachment as objective, irrefutable scientific evidence.''
``hese four defendants intended to take his life.''
and ``ave you ever been exposed to persons who show, or who have shown, racial, sexual, religious, or ethnic prejudice?''
he ouima trial, too, is bound to be perceived _ and treated _ as a showcase of the dark underbelly of the ....
otential jurors have been instructed to fill out a 42-page questionnaire, asking 128 questions, such as ``o you think there is a prospect of social unrest following a verdict in this case?''
hese four defendants intended to take his life.''
he block will named for fficer incent uidice, who died in ay 1996 after he fell on the shards of a broken mirror while responding to a domestic dispute.
he iallo case has spawned three official investigations _ by the  ustice epartment, federal prosecutors, and the ew ork state attorney general _ into a possible pattern of racial discrimination in the department's practices.
_ he olice epartment's nternal ffairs ureau has done an extensive re-enactment of the shooting at the department's firing range.
echt's analysis that those shots came early in the sequence is based, in part, on the amount of blood from those wounds that filled his chest cavity.
he mayor is scheduled to rename the block in front of the 50th recinct station house, on ingsbridge venue at est 236th treet.
he defendants remain on restricted duty pending the outcome of the trial, which is scheduled for anuary.
he judge rejected defense arguments that public outcry and intense media coverage following the shooting put undue pressure on the grand jury to issue the murder indictments.
nside the courtroom, though, the atmosphere was solemn.
iuliani declined to comment on the charges, but said earlier in the day: ``e should allow the criminal justice system to now operate.
t is not unusual for a prosecutor to brief a victim's family on criminal charges, he added, even in cases far less publicized than the iallo case.
he lawyers also said there could be pretrial scheduling conflicts because of other trials some of them are involved in, like the bner ouima case, in which officers are accused of brutalizing a aitian immigrant.
he potential significance of the forensic evidence is apparent in the efforts being expended by all sides to collect it:
ome of the details were first reported uesday in he ew ork ost.
tate upreme ourt udge ohn . ollins set bail at $100,000 for each officer, which was expected to be met.
ronx istrict ttorney obert ohnson noted ew ork law does not require him to prove premeditation on the part of the four officers.
l harpton, who organized the daily protests over the iallo shooting and is an adviser to the family, also is expected to attend the meeting, said teven eed, ohnson's spokesman.
ornberg said later that if orth was not disqualified, ornberg might push for a separate trial for arroll.
l harpton stepped to the microphone outside the ronx ounty outhouse and bellowed: ``he police in there have just been charged with murder in the second degree,'' and the crowd of hundreds whooped and cheered.
ohnson has refused to confirm reports, based on people familiar with the case, that the officers will be charged with second-degree murder.
cellon reportedly slipped and fell as the officers confronted iallo.
he iallo family's lawyers believe this bullet, as well as a second bullet that the autopsy says hit iallo's middle toe ``adjacent to the front of the nail,'' indicate that iallo was shot after he had fallen.
harpton's ational ction etwork in arlem has helped finance the iallo family's trips to and from ew ork ity.
he officers were immediately suspended from the force.
f the matters are likely to be contested, the judge might set dates for hearings.
ince there were apparently no eyewitnesses who saw the whole incident except for the officers, such evidence _ and the often fuzzy or conflicting interpretations it can yield _ could be a crucial element in the officers' trial on murder charges.
bout 1,000 demonstrators stood outside the courthouse.
ut arvyn ornberg, who represents fficer ean arroll, said the officers' semiautomatic weapons fired so fast that it is impossible to determine with any precision when the shots to the chest were fired.
he four police officers have yet to officially explain their actions.
teven rounstein, oss's attorney, said in court that ohnson had ``succumbed to a political agenda.
hey left the courtroom to the cheers of nearly 200 other officers, gathered outside the ronx ounty uilding.
cellon supposedly slipped and fell as he and the other officers confronted iallo.
iuliani said ednesday: ``e should allow the criminal justice system to now operate.''
arlier ednesday, iuliani and olice ommissioner oward afir attended a tribute to a police officer killed in the line of duty in 1996.
f course, it is far from certain that a verdict in the case will hinge on forensic evidence.
he parents, who are divorced, were last in ew ork in early ebruary, when they came to collect their son's body for burial in uinea and found that his death had set off a storm of political protest that has yet to abate.
``ou can't tell which is first and which is second.
ater in the day, lawyer ohnnie ochran, who is representing iallo's parents, announced he will sue the city for civil damages, saying, ``e will be relentless in our pursuit of justice.''
he officers were immediately suspended from their jobs.
ednesday's indictment coincided with the start of jury selection in the trial of the five officers in rooklyn who were indicted in last year's torture and sodomy, inside a stationhouse bathroom, of aitian immigrant bner ouima.
``hat the forensic evidence will not show is that these officers fired repeatedly into a prone body.
any of the protesters  white and black, celebrities and common folk  also demonstrated against the alleged police torture of aitian immigrant bner ouima in 1997 and the feeling that law-abiding minorities are routinely humiliated by police stop-and-search tactics.
ut the iallos, who met with ohnson for half an hour before the arraignment, and their supporters expressed satisfaction with the indictments.
``madou's blood will feed the battle for justice,'' his mother, adiadou iallo, told 1,000 supporters outside the courthouse.
sked if the timing of the arraignment was scheduled to accommodate the iallo family's travel plans, eed said he would not comment.
hey could get 25 years to life in prison on the murder charges.
hey could get 25 years to life in prison on the murder charges.
hat case is set to begin on uesday.
ince the shooting, ew ork's street-crime unit has been ordered to wear uniforms instead of plainclothes, and 50 slots at the predominantly white division will be reassigned to minority police officers.
riday, acting ustice atricia nne illiams, who refused defense requests to put off scheduling a date for the case, chose the an. 3 date after the defense lawyers said they would need time to go through the prosecution's evidence and discuss possible pretrial motions.
he arraignment and the subsequent comments by the officers' lawyers offered a glimpse of the defense they will provide.
t was unclear from uesday's accounts who fired the first shot.
orth said that the officers reported to their new assignments riday but would not officially start work until onday, on what police officials called administrative assignments.
he officers did not know it, but it was the building where he lived.
arvyn ornberg, arroll's lawyer, called the murder count ``ludicrous.''
arvyn ornberg, arroll's lawyer, called the intentional murder count ``ludicrous.''
he last such case was in uly 1997, when fficer aolo olecchia was convicted of second-degree manslaughter for fatally shooting an unarmed man in the back as he fled down a ronx subway platform.
``hat's the district attorney saying, that they had nothing to do that night but roll up on an individual and attempt to kill him because he's black?''
here are apparently no eyewitnesses to confirm or rebut that account, although several of iallo's neighbors on heeler venue have said they saw a portion of the incident and heard the shooting.
and another falling down some steps as if he had been shot.
t that point, arroll yelled, ``un!''
he autopsy report does indicate that two shots, one from the front and one from the back, perforated iallo's spine at separate points.
hat they had nothing to do that night but roll up on an individual and attempt to kill him because he's black?''
fter the arraignment, ornberg said his client, arroll, had seen a ``black object'' _ which turned out to be iallo's wallet _ coming out of the victim's back pocket.
he slaying has frayed ayor udolph iuliani's already strained relationship with the black community, and many have accused him of failing to understand the depth of ew orkers' anger.
hose protests are now over, but harpton promised ednesday, ``e will keep on marching, we will keep the pressure on.''
``e grieve for madou iallo and the four officers involved and pray they get a fair trial,'' afir said.
``e grieve for madou iallo and the four officers involved and pray they get a fair trial,'' afir said.
ut inside state upreme ourt, the defense team showed signs of division.
t was a point that orth disputed outside court by saying, `` don't think  have a conflict of interest, though it is obvious that ornberg would like for me to go.''
hat happens next could intensify, rather than quell, the racial tensions that have been simmering in the two months since the shooting.
udge ohn ollins set bail at $100,000 for each officer, although ohnson had asked that they be held without bail.
olice officers have rarely been convicted for killings that occurred while they were on duty.
ore than 1,200 people have been arrested in the city in demonstrations since iallo was cut down in the fusillade.
ut if the delay was welcome, there were still ornberg's efforts to force orth, the official lawyer for the atrolmen's enevolent ssociation, off the case.
awyers on both sides ednesday offered previews of the cases they will argue when the trial starts pril 30.
``ou are talking about a matter of eight seconds,'' he said.
iallo's father would only say, ``'m very happy.''
 few hundred off-duty officers rallied outside the ronx courthouse ednesday, as well, some shouting, ``o justice, no police'' _ a threatening play on harpton's chant, ``o justice, no peace.''
iallo's father, aikou mad iallo, arrived here ednesday from the est frican nation of uinea and said he was anxious to see the officers not only charged, but brought to trial.
ssuming the officers testify, their credibility in asserting that they feared for their lives in the mistaken belief that iallo was armed could also be a decisive factor.
he officers left the courthouse together shortly after the arraignment.
ut the iallo family's lawyers dismissed the officers' version as ``absurd,'' pointing to an autopsy by their pathologist, r. yril . echt of ennsylvania, that suggests that iallo was knocked down and paralyzed quite early in the barrage.
he iallo shooting has set off the largest protests the city has seen in years _ and cast a serious blemish on the pride of ayor udolph iuliani's five years as mayor.
he killing has frayed ayor udolph iuliani's already tense relationship with ew ork's black community.
arlier ednesday, iuliani and olice ommissioner oward afir attended an emotional tribute to a cop killed in the line of duty in 1996.
rosecutors turned over more than 160 pages of forensic, ballistic and crime scene evidence to the defense lawyers, adding that more would be forthcoming.
ut the iallo family lawyers have shown no such reticence, virtually constructing a criminal case against the officers while preparing the civil suit.
 ith the indictments barely unsealed against four police officers in the madou iallo shooting, a battle is already taking shape over physical evidence in the case, as lawyers and experts seek to buttress their own versions of what happened based on entrance wounds, bullet trajectories and other forensic details.
_ efense lawyers have employed their own set of crime-scene specialists who may be called to rebut whatever theories the prosecution's experts propose.
iallo's mother, adiadou iallo, had tears in her eyes.
hile the trial date would come nearly a year after iallo's death on the night of eb. 4, it is not unusual in such high-publicity cases.
harles arron, an organizer of the protests, said the iallos would speak at rallies organized around other high-profile cases in which the police are accused of brutality against young black men.
n a 15 days leading up to ednesday's indictment203 people _ including prominent officials, lawyers and other professionals of all races and religions _ were arrested in harpton-led civil-disobedience protests outside police department headquarters.
he mother, adiadou iallo, and two of her children, are expected to arrive at ewark nternational irport from uinea on hursday morning.
ut it seems likely that a dizzying parade of expert witnesses will take the stand at the trial to debate the trigonometric calculation of bullet trajectories, and more importantly, to contradict one another.
``f they weren't present, or there wasn't a quorum, these indictments may be dismissed on motions,'' ornberg said.
hat happened next is sure to be the subject of much debate at the future criminal trial of the four officers.
ff-duty police officers and more than 25 of iallo's friends and relatives packed the small courtroom for the 45-minute arraignment.
l harpton, a family adviser, ``so the alibi they have put on the court record will devastate the defense.''
he judge said the next court appearance would be on ept. 29, when she would decide all motions.
``aving exercised that right, they cannot then say, `e're police officers, therefore what we did was ,''' he said.
y client is innocent of all charges.
s there anything at the crime scene to explain why the officers unleashed such firepower at an unarmed man?
efense lawyers dispute that conclusion and argue that the incident took so little time that the officers most likely had no chance to gauge the impact of their initial shots as they fired subsequent rounds.
uring the outcry the officers, their lawyers and law-enforcement officials have remained silent about what set off the shooting.
``ithout explanation, what we have is four people driving up to a location, pulling out their guns and killing an individual.''
t turned out later to be his black wallet.
afir called iallo's death a tragedy but urged critics of the olice epartment to ``acknowledge the tragedies that befall our family.''
``deally, the physical evidence should support one conclusion,'' said eter . e orest, a professor at ohn ay ollege of riminal ustice.
_ he  dispatched a team of ballistic experts from ashington who spent days making measurements of the crime scene and traced bullet trajectories with lasers.
he case has inspired a painful examination of police attitudes and tactics across the nation.
mong the spectators, on one side of the aisle were iallo's parents, who had flown in from uinea for the occasion, along with friens and relatives.
he issue of severing the cases is important because the defendants will probably need one another's testimony to corroborate their accounts of the shooting.
fter the initial motions, other issues may arise, including whether any of the defendants ask for separate trials and whether the officers waive their right to a jury trial.
fter the court proceedings, the officers briefly thanked their supporters, and proclaimed their innocence.
``ut what often happens is that one side or the other pays someone to dispute it and the science gets polluted.''
``ven under duress,'' ackson said, ``those who are called to uphold the law must be held at a higher standard.''
ince the slaying, the street-crime unit has been ordered to wear uniforms instead of plainclothes, and 50 slots at the predominantly white division will be reassigned to minority police officers.
rosecutors will be given deadlines to respond to those motions.
he officers heard cheers, too  from scores of their off-duty colleagues, most of them white.
ny medical examiner who testifies to that can expect some rigorous cross examination.''
cellon and arroll got out of their maroon ord aurus and approached iallo on the stoop.
yes welling, brows knitted, urphy said, `` did nothing wrong and this trial will show that  did nothing wrong.''
``madou iallo was already on the ground with his spinal cord severed,'' said the ev.
he city's autopsy indicates that one shot struck iallo just above the heel and traveled up the calf before lodging behind the knee, people who reviewed the report have said.
arlier this month, resident linton said he was worried that recent charges of police misconduct could undermine the fight against crime.
arlier this month, resident linton said he was worried that recent charges of police misconduct could undermine the fight against crime.
any have accused him of failing to understand the depth of ew orkers' anger over the incident.
afir called iallo's death a tragedy but urged  critics to ``acknowledge the tragedies that befall our family.''
he four officers, wearing suits, sat stonefaced.
he case also reflects tension over police attitudes and tactics nationally.
hen they came in ebruary, shortly after their son's killing, they attained near-celebrity status _ trailed by television cameras, greeted by crowds and transported from place to place by motorcade.
``ou can question their story based on common sense and logic and what passersby might have seen or heard.
... ow you move to another stage in which the crime has to be proved beyond a reasonable doubt.''
uite the contrary,  expect it to show the opposite, that, namely, the vast majority of the shots, if not all of the shots, were fired at a standing person.''
ut many people are now wondering if the social cost _ white officers behaving too aggressively and intrusively in minority neighborhoods _ might be too high.
 request for a change of venue is also possible, he said.
eanwhile, some police are shouting back.
 second set of bullets that struck iallo's right leg and foot also figure to be a source of debate.
hose perforations are the primary basis for the family's conclusion that he was paralyzed.
iallo remained silent during the whole encounter, they said.
rime has dramatically declined, with murders down by over 70 percent, to the lowest point since the early 1960s.
he had been expected uesday, but had to cancel her flight because the .. mbassy in the uinean capital of onakry was unexpectedly closed onday and she was not able to pick up her visas.