``e have to try to make it work,'' he said.
n 2000, the nvironmental rotection gency, ashington, .., and several states vowed that the hesapeake ay would be cleaned up within 10 years.
``ut it's part getting the data and part the will, since no one has done this before.
``t was going to be the '90s ... then the year 2000, then it was the year 2010,'' he said.
y early next year, state and federal agencies expect to complete research on restoring the native oyster to the hesapeake ay.
ast year's native oyster harvest was about 23,000 bushels, less than 1 percent of the figure 30 years ago.
``'m certainly not going to tell you that we can't meet it,'' anmer said.
he aryland epartment of atural esources also is considering introducing a nonnative  and, they hope, disease-resistant  species to the bay.
s their numbers grow, industry officials said, bass are eating too many menhaden.
"f you spend $10,000 and make $5,000, it doesn't take long for you to get out of it.
he sian oysters are believed to be resistant to the diseases that have killed off native oysters in the hesapeake.
aryland may be rushing crucial research on introducing sian oysters into the hesapeake ay, the states of elaware and ew ersey said this week, joining several federal agencies in asking that the new species be studied further.
``e don't have any other models of (ecosystem based management) to go off of.
he more than 350 sewage plants in the hesapeake ay watershed account for about 21 percent of its nitrogen, according to the .
t took three, with ashington, the states and the federal government spending a combined $1 billion a year.
``e proved it can be done,'' said onathan cnight, an official with the aryland epartment of atural esources.
he managed reserve method is ``the beginning of a new approach to managing oysters and oyster disease,'' said oldsborough of the hesapeake ay oundation.
``f we don't do ecosystem-based, we may as well give up,'' he said.
or weeks this fall, even as t. ary's ounty celebrated the beginning of oyster season with festivals and contests, ucker and gnes rown couldn't find oysters.
``e're dead in the water,'' ucker rown said.
ysters, an important filter for the water and once the mainstay of the region's fishing industry, have been decimated, their numbers dropping to historic lows.
nce the hesapeake ay's premiere species, native oysters have been virtually wiped out due to over-harvesting and disease.
ucker rown grew up a waterman in a family of watermen, and in his 67 years, he said, he's just about tried it all.
hey worry that the sian oysters could bring new diseases or adapt to the hesapeake so well that they squeeze out native species of oysters and clams.
``fter it's done, it's going to be irreversible,'' she said.
``ying this whole issue up in court isn't going to move it forward at all,'' he said.
``e are not going to introduce an oyster that we have questions about,'' said ecretary of atural esources onald ranks.
tate governors from around the watershed have approved a proposal that would create a massive new pool of funding for the bay, with $12 billion from the federal government.
ederal funding for oyster restoration efforts in aryland and irginia exceeded $4 million this year, organizers of aturday's event said.
s federal biologists begin to test ecosystem-based management, the debate around menhaden and bass is heating up.
dvocates who last were together 20 years ago, when declining stocks of striped bass prompted an ast oast ban on catching the fish, are reuniting to take on the menhaden industry.
ust a few years ago, there were thousands of people oystering in aryland; this year, they expect fewer than 150.
ut on the water, the oysters have kept dying.
here were once almost 2,000 of the boats working the bay, but today, they number near 30, with only about 10 used for oystering.
he dwindling supply of oysters in the hesapeake ay  last season's haul was about 24,000 bushels, less than 1 percent of what it was three decades ago  has hurt him the most.
``ithout major funding, there's no way we're going to meet that 2010 goal,'' said ennsylvania ov.
ive years of planning, they say, have left the bay no cleaner than it was when the ``hesapeake 2000'' pact was signed.
fficials in aryland said they hope their success can be a model for the roughly 16 other states with nutria problems.
n its petition filed in ecember, the bay foundation noted that almost none of those sewage plants had permits that limited nitrogen pollution and asked the  to remedy that.
``pecial-interest groups are trying to twist this to get the outcome they want and will give ecosystem-based management a bad name.''
t issue are two of the nation's most important fish: the striped bass and the tlantic menhaden.
he states issued a statement saying that the sian oyster is still ``a virtual unknown'' and could bring diseases or other ecological problems that would spread to their coasts.
hat is because hesapeake watermen pulled an all-time low of about 25,000 bushels of oysters from the bay last year, compared with 80,000 in 1993  and a staggering 15 million back in the glory days of 1885.
 survey of the bay's grasses in 2003, found about 64,000 acres  35 percent of the goal.
his year,  officials expect about 15,000.
``hen one part of it dies, you have to figure out, how am  going to get to another part?''
``he major problems that the hesapeake ay agreement was designed to diminish are still there.''
ven so, cleanup officials say, they expected to accomplish more by now than they have.
nstead, their numbers have fallen off sharply because of pollution, low oxygen and endemic disease.
 he agreement promised to increase the number of oysters tenfold.
till, he said, it might be two years before the changes go through.
ish and ildlife ervice, nvironmental rotection gency and ational ceanographic and tmospheric dministration.
he whole effort will require millions more in funding and many more trappers, officials said.
oth irginia and aryland have been spending several million dollars each year to restore native populations, and they are considering introducing a heartier nonnative species to the bay.
``e think that 41/2 years is enough time to determine that they are not interested'' in moving more quickly, he said.
``hat we want to do is lock in a better bay program that will be a hundred times more effective,'' ilchrest said.
he industry has said that the matter centers on social priorities and that menhaden farming is an important business.
onservation and anglers' groups each have said they are sure the new approach will prove their points.
``hy shouldn't the striped bass be managed for the benefit of the menhaden?''
any conservation and anglers groups accuse the menhaden industry, which uses spotter planes to locate schools, of catching too many fish  starving the striped bass and upsetting the bay ecosystem.
ust a few miles across the hesapeake ay ridge from nnapolis, the waters of ent arrows, which leads to the bay, were home to 13 oyster packing houses at about the time arris' opened in 1947.
t has emerged as an issue now because the native oyster  crucial to filtering the bay's waters and supporting its fleet of watermen  has almost vanished from the hesapeake.
he watermen will next be able to harvest oysters, which also help filter the water, at the three sites ov. 13.
his year, even the harvest of gulf oysters was stalled by storms.
e see the old generation that's passed on, and there's no younger one to take their place.
xperts say the problem was a desire to plan all pollution efforts in minute detail while keeping major changes on hold.
ouglas enkins r. of irginia's orthern eck, said he's seen the signs both on land  where the number of watermen has dropped because of low oyster harvests  and in the water.
ast weekend, three generations of the eck family  ill, son raig and father ohn, 76  boarded their boat with renewed optimism as nearly 4,000 bushels of disease-free oysters were made available for harvesting for the first time since they were hatched and planted three years ago.
he ecks were among two dozen watermen, some scuba-diving and some using hand tongs, who set out to get their share of the disease-free oysters from three managed reserves, known as mory ollow and lunts ar in the hester iver and olingbroke ands in the hoptank iver.
lready there is no shortage of opposition to this plan.
hile watermen have been able to harvest oysters elsewhere, they agreed not to harvest in the managed reserves for several years until the majority of the oysters grew to four inches, one inch bigger than the state's legal size.
ysters ... enfold increase by 2010 ...
``e're so low that the next stop is zero,'' said ete ensen, an official with the epartment of atural esources.
cientists worry it will bring in disease; based on their concerns, aryland state legislators are trying to block it.
he leaders of several states in the hesapeake ay watershed agreed onday to lobby apitol ill for about $12 billion for cleaning up the bay.
he managed reserve program is one of many efforts to reverse what scientists have called a disturbing trend.
he studies will also examine the potential impact of introducing a new species of oyster that appears resistant to the diseases.
hat agreement  signed by the , the .. mayor and the governors of aryland, irginia and ennsylvania  set a goal of removing the hesapeake from the national ``impaired waters'' list by 2010.
s drawn up by the aliles panel, the federal commitment would be spread over time, beginning with $1 billion this year and building to $2.5 billion in 2010.
fter that, ranks said, the data will be reviewed by a panel of experts appointed by hrlich and irginia ov.
aybe the government will bring in a new kind of oyster that can survive in the bay.
everal organizations and federal agencies worked together to manage the project, including the ational ceanic and tmospheric dministration and the yster ecovery artnership, a nonprofit group whose mission is to restore the bay's oyster population.
he hesapeake xecutive ouncil, a group of state and federal officials overseeing the bay cleanup, voted to support a new central financing authority with the power to disperse billions to various hesapeake-related projects.
lso, the yster ecovery artnership, an alliance of organizations, businesses and individuals, has planted more than 330 million disease-free oyster seeds from the niversity of aryland's enter for nvironmental cience in 33 locations in the bay since 2000.
n five years alone, the aryland oyster harvest has dropped 92 percent, hitting a record low last year with 26,000 bushels.
t mory ollow, the seven participating watermen collected just 10 to 15 bushels.
hat process was supposed to take one year.
his grim portrait doesn't mean that there are no oysters left in the hesapeake.
 nderwater grasses are supposed to grow to 185,000 acres by 2010.
he idea behind the recent eradication effort was to use full-time trappers, paid by the hour and not by the nutria.
s a key source of food for other fish and a major filter for the algae and other particles in the bay, the menhaden ``ecologically speaking, (is) the most important animal'' in the bay, the hesapeake ay oundation says.
n addition to the managed reserve program, some researchers have turned to creating sanctuaries filled with oysters that watermen are barred from harvesting.
hirteen years before, the same entities had pledged to reduce the pollutants nitrogen and phosphorus in the bay by 40 percent.
n the 1970s and '80s, before diseases started their rampant spread through the bay, the average harvest reported to the aryland epartment of atural esources was more than 2 million bushels.
ut most also said the cleanup effort was not close to meeting a self-imposed deadline of a healthy bay by 2010.
ut even she wouldn't say the cleanup effort is on pace to meet the 2010 deadline.
s lobbying efforts begin, the executive council voted to create a panel of experts which would report back by uly1 with details on how the regional financing authority might be created.
``ow people cannot say, 'ebecca, we don't know what needs to be done,' '' she said.
anmer pointed to some recent successes, including aryland's passage of a ``flush tax'' to reduce pollution from sewage plants and the 's requirement that plants must further clean the water they dump into the watershed.
t was touted as ``merica's premier watershed restoration partnership,'' supported by the nvironmental rotection gency and representatives from ennsylvania, aryland, irginia and ashington, ..
t called for a central authority with 20 percent of its funding drawn from state sources and 80 percent from the federal government.
he oysters were spawned at the niversity of aryland's enter for nvironmental cience, then planted in the managed reserves, where they grew under the supervision of scientists.
he tools were unwieldy, including several federal agencies and an array of state governments that eventually included elaware, est irginia and ew ork.
ere is the progress on a few of the important goals for the bay, based on information from the 's hesapeake ay rogram.
ut now regulators say they want to manage the nation's fisheries as one big ecosystem, basing their targets on many elements, including the diet of water birds, the quality of the water and whether predator fish have enough prey.
``e've tried ... to give  a chance to fulfill its promises.''
 regulators responded with a draft proposal that eventually would impose such permits on most of the plants.
he epicenter of the movement is the hesapeake ay, where federal regulators are launching a test case for ``ecosystem-based management.''
aryland officials responded ednesday that they would not make any moves before they were sure the new oyster is safe.
ut some oysters do survive in the bay.
ndustry advocates said that they also favor viewing the fisheries as one interconnected system but that current data aren't sufficient to limit fishing for menhaden in the bay.
n fact, experts say by some measures  such as the declining oyster population and large areas of oxygen-poor ``bad water''  the bay seems to be getting worse.
arris' shucks, packs and sells them at its packing company and serves them in its dockside restaurant overlooking the narrows.
n the other side is arrison's yster acking, another of the handful of oyster houses still in operation.
n places like ilghman, watermen still motor up to the dock at arrison's packing company to deliver their day's haul, just as they have for generations, and inside, shuckers still wait to crack them open in record time, as they, too, have done for generations.
arris' is a holdout in a devastated industry; one of the last oyster-packing companies on the hesapeake, where once there were hundreds.
he decline of the region's oyster population has changed life on the water, but the rowns keep looking ahead.
hese pollutants, when washed downstream to the bay, feed algae blooms that suck oxygen out of the water.
ince then, the rating has changed  to 27.
his year, even the gulf couldn't fill their early orders after heavy rains closed some oyster beds.
"f it wasn't for that,  wouldn't be able to keep afloat."
``t's a dying breed,'' hillips said.
ince then, experts on the bay say it has become only slightly healthier.
arvesting oysters, crabs or rockfish for 10 to 15 hours a day earns eck just $25,000 a year.
"his boat costs $10,000 a year to keep up," ond said.
nderwater grasses ... 185,000 acres by 2010 ... fter some increases, pollution swept down by heavy rains in 2003 destroyed many grasses; at last count, there were about 64,000 acres.
... ou find something else to take its place.''
n 2000, the foundation rated the bay a 28.
ow did the bay get to this condition?
``t was a major battle that has, for the most part, been won,'' said acoby arter, a national expert on nutria for the .. eological urvey.
or decades, the rowns, like most watermen, have adapted as diseases, pollution and commercial fisheries have taken their toll on the hesapeake ay and its rivers.
he ecks had worked diligently along the hester iver, ill eck dragging a hand tong through the water as his son and father sorted and measured their catch.
aker said that environmentalists are frustrated that the bay has made so little progress in the three decades since the cleanup began, and particularly in the four years since the signing of the landmark hesapeake 2000 agreement.
he agreement to clean the bay in 10 years promised twice as much underwater grass, 10 times as many oysters, and water as pristine as in the 1950s.
nd just in case, they're thinking of ideas for a new business  another try.
n an earlier time, they would have been prepping their dredges for oyster season, but most won't be dredging this year.
athilde gge, program administrator for the yster ecovery artnership, one of the project managers, said many mory ollow oysters were smaller than four inches and couldn't be harvested.
hat goal, set in the landmark hesapeake 2000 agreement five years ago, would require huge reductions that have yet to be seen in several pollutants.
ollution ... educe problems so the bay can be removed from the 's ``impaired waters'' list by 2010 ...
ulie hompson, a biologist with the ish and ildlife ervice, said ednesday that the federal agencies were concerned that the sian oyster would be impossible to remove once released in the wild.
n monetary terms, nutria cause about $2.8 million worth of economic damage annually by reducing opportunities for hunting, fishing and hiking, according to a report by the epartment of atural esources.
hen there is the hinese oyster, which governors in aryland and irginia believe might resist disease and provide a natural pollution filter.
``e will be up in the halls of ongress within the next 45 days to lobby for the additional federal support,'' arner said.
ome scientists worry they won't have answers that quickly, but the rowns are tired of waiting.
o the bay foundation decided to go to court, asking a federal judge in ashington .. to speed up the 's formal response.
``e could have gotten to work,'' atuszeski said.
ranks said ednesday that all the necessary research has been compressed into a year.
hey urged officials in aryland, where ov.
he idea was, ``if we can do this ... nobody else in the world has an excuse,'' said illiam atuszeski, who was then overseeing the bay cleanup for the .
elaware and ew ersey will not have a say.
``usiness as usual won't work,'' said former irginia ov.
ut the commission refused, citing a dearth of data linking bass and menhaden.
e don't have enough information,'' said ancy allace, the commission's coordinator for menhaden management.
``ome days  sit here,  don't want to do this anymore.
"oung people now don't want to shuck oysters," ilghman said.
rom the dock, ason uth, a worker at arris', began culling the pile with an expert's eye, selecting those to keep and shuck and those to return to the bay.
or early settlers, oyster reefs were so abundant that they posed a hazard for navigation, and with the introduction of canning in the 1800s, the hesapeake became the source for oysters around the world.
rganizers would try to determine how to ensure that oystermen take home a bigger haul before the next harvesting, gge said.
he summer of 2003 was one of the worst on record, as nearly 40 percent of the hesapeake became a suffocating expanse that environmentalists dubbed the ``dead zone.''
eaped like a pile of rocks in the middle of the boat was the morning's haul  oysters, the rough and craggy bottom dwellers that have been the shining jewels of the hesapeake ay for generations.
n the summer, the trappers had to fend off mosquitoes and biting greenhead flies.
here were also spiders and the danger of the occasional bite from a nutria's inch-long orange buckteeth.
n paper is the bay as national treasure, on the way to resurrection.
hose oysters command a higher price and have a better chance of reproducing, organizers said.
he failures leave a bewildering disconnect for those who are removed from the nitty-gritty of environmental policy.
oogie opsey of echanicsville, d., who works for the rowns, smashed shells down a metal chute with a long pole, clearing space to shuck some more.
he two states' criticism marks a new turn in the saga of rassostrea riakensis, a native of hina that has recently caused unusual divisions within the staid world of shellfish management.
hey, too, are holdouts, though called upon less and less to dredge.
t's a ritual that scientists and anglers have performed for ages in an effort to understand the world beneath the water's surface.
t the clanging of a bell, every 20 minutes or so, cars stop and the bridge slowly lifts as if raising a hand in greeting to the boats coming in and out of the harbor.
ollier, now in the hesapeake ay aritime useum in t. ichaels.
any of the remaining skipjacks have become museum pieces, like the artha ewis in altimore, preserved by the hesapeake eritage onservancy, and the ..
o ave oewensteiner, chief scientist aboard the quarius, everything is at stake.
ost days, the stainless steel sinks and tables inside their shuck house were shining, untouched.
eaves yellowed and crab apples fell, and often the radio played country songs to no one, echoing through the empty cinderblock building.
ike the watermen, shuckers are born into this hearty business more often than not.
pening a cold, tenacious oyster quickly without harming or slicing the tender meat within takes skill and gumption.
``ur classical approaches have been like trying to understand traffic problems by focusing on the cars without focusing on the road,'' said homas iller, an ecologist with the niversity of aryland's hesapeake iological aboratory.
``any people feel fisheries management has generally failed to preserve fish, and they're looking to a`new holy grail,'' said ichael rbach, who teaches marine policy at uke niversity and has advised the government on fisheries management and conflicts.
illed with art galleries, coffee shops and restaurants, the town of aston makes a good base for exploring the region.
everidge shoveled ice around jars of sealed oysters.
embers measured each creature and weighed it, then headed back to the lab to dissect each one and study what it had eaten.
he sun had just risen over the atuxent iver when the crew of the quarius launched its routine: casting a 30-foot net off the trawler's bow, hauling it in and flinging its contents of writhing fish and crabs onto a wooden slab.
he front parlor is home to an acclaimed restaurant whose menu relies on local ingredients.
or instance, boat anchors used to come up with a menagerie of tiny bottom-dwelling animals crawling on them: sand fleas, worms, snails.
ut if you turn off oute 50 at aston, and cut west toward the bay, the road quickly gives way to farmland, brown and drying corn stalks, pumpkin patches and fields dipped in gold at the hands of fall before opening onto the water.
ere, the mighty oyster is toasted in the wood-paneled oyster bars of nnapolis  carvey's, 'rien's and the iddleton avern  and honored along the bay's shores at festivals, shucking contests and skipjack races.
t was a daunting task: to reduce pollution spewing from a multitude of city sewers, farms and factories across a 64,000-square-mile watershed.
cientists point to the havoc caused in the bay ecosystem by other nonnative species: he mute swan and beaverlike nutria chew up crucial grasses, and the toothy northern snakehead has worried fishermen in the otomac iver.
``t started to dwindle down, and then it just, like  dropped,'' said im everidge the rowns' middle daughter, who works with her parents in the shuck house.
 aryland congressman is contemplating legislation to replace the voluntary cleanup strategy with strict regulatory requirements.
hat's how it's always been in venue, a t. ary's neighborhood with stacks of just-chopped firewood, sheds, wheelbarrows and tarps.
he towns along the peninsula's west coast, places like t. ichaels, xford and risfield, aren't easy to reach down twisting two-lane roads that dead end at the water's edge.
here are ilghman sland ay, the . illard awes yster and ull oast in risfield, the t. ichaels ysterfest, the rbanna yster estival, and the biggest pearl of them all for oyster lovers _the t. ary's ounty yster estival this weekend, home to the ational yster hucking hampionship and ational yster ook-ff ontest.
ndeed, fall oyster celebrations still abound in bayside communities on the hesapeake, where old traditions die hard and the oysters remain as much a symbol of the season's arrival as cider, apples and pumpkins.
his eptember, the anti-nutria team got the news they were waiting for: urveys showed they had effectively cleared the animals from more than 35,000 acres in and around lackwater.
he lackwater refuge originally contained about 13,000 acres of marshland, situated near the hesapeake in orchester ounty.
f you ask, you may find the oysters you order are from ong sland or the ulf of exico, but in the height of oyster season, when the annual grind is under way, you are just as likely to get that coveted response, "from a local oyster bed."
he group aims to harvest the seeded oysters in time to save them from being attacked by ermo or , within three years.
e's helped move seed out of hatcheries to oyster bars, and he's kept a hand in the aryland atermen's ssociation.
ut in ouisiana, the only state with a bigger nutria population than aryland's, authorities said they doubted whether a similar eradication was possible there.
 he 2000 agreement targeted the problem of low dissolved oxygen, a condition in which fish and crabs can't breathe.
n 1987, the irginia arine esources ommission issued more than 2,000 licenses for oystering; in 2003, it issued about 300.
verharvesting and pollution have taken a toll on the native oyster, but far bigger threats to the species are two parasites that attack them, ermo and , which were first detected in the bay in the 1960s.
``here's just not a lot of people out there who can stomach them,'' said an urphy of the ish and ildlife ervice's hesapeake office.
t's made enkins, the orthern eck waterman, skeptical of all deadlines for the hesapeake's comeback.
he annual figure has fallen to $500,000.
he shell landed back in the water with a splash.
hose animals are gone, and probably dead, enkins said.
ome scientists and watermen say the bay shows few signs that anybody has spent five years trying to save it.
``verybody that was on the water got off the water because you can't make a living.''
ut many observers wonder how the states will get the money since the federal government is already tightening budgets.
ermanently preserve from development 20 percent of the land area in the watershed by 2010 ... 19.5% preserved
`` lot of people have come back to try and address these issues,'' he said.
``here's no disagreement with the bay foundation that this is a necessary next step,'' said on apacasa, an official at the  regional office that oversees the bay.
'm going to catch tourists instead.
he suit is one of several recent legal steps initiated by environmental groups, which traditionally have relied on consensus, rather than confrontation, with government agencies in the effort to clean up the bay.
he hesapeake ay oundation will file a lawsuit against the nvironmental rotection gency ednesday, signaling a more aggressive strategy for a group that has grown increasingly frustrated over the slow progress in cleaning up the bay.
ut supporting the financing authority doesn't make it so: here's still the matter of persuading ongress to come up with the bulk of the $15 billion needed to pay for the plan.
``ut you've got to worry about the guerrilla warfare.''
onday's annual meeting, at a conference center on the grounds of ount ernon, a., provided a chance for officials from irginia, aryland, ennsylvania, the istrict of olumbia and the .. nvironmental rotection gency to assess the bay's health.
efore the meeting, the hesapeake ay oundation led a rally in which speakers accused government officials of dragging their feet on bay cleanup measures.
his would mean reducing nitrogen and phosphorus, found in suburban lawn fertilizer, processed sewage and animal manure.
nd aryland watermen are considering a class-action lawsuit against polluters, including sewage treatment plants and manufacturers that dump into the bay's watershed.
overnors are pledging to walk the halls of ongress lobbying for $12 billion in needed support.
pecifically, the suit asks that the  respond formally to the bay foundation petition submitted in ecember seeking limits on the amount of nitrogen released from such plants.
ased on their recommendations, hrlich and arner will decide whether to move forward on the oysters or to request more research, ranks said.
orman urphy is a middle-aged waterman who grew up on ilghman sland working the bay, as his own son does now.
:  hesapeake ay rogram, staff reporting
ark . arner (), the hesapeake executive council's outgoing chairman, said the lobbying effort would begin soon.
atuszeski, the bay program's leader from 1991 to 2001, said officials knew their work would revolve around renovating sewage plants and keeping farm manure out of streams.
ut the federal agency has not provided a formal answer to the bay foundation's demands, and aker said the draft proposal contains ``weasel words'' that might allow the  to back out of key provisions.
``ur only recourse is to litigate,'' said illiam . aker, the bay foundation's president.
he industry has responded by blaming the bass.
ach year the charter business gets bigger and bigger, urphy said.
ncluding him: `` don't eat rat,'' urphy said.
hat study, performed by the .. rmy orps of ngineers, could be finished in the next couple of weeks, he said.
ade urphy, a third-generation waterman with 40 years of oystering behind him, runs charter tours on his skipjack, the ebecca . uark, built in 1886.
ut watermen still bring in salty, succulent oysters every year, and those are abundant at bay restaurants, raw bars, seafood stores and festivals.
n ogwood arbor on ilghman, fishing boats still outnumber sailboats and pleasure craft.
n one side of the bridge is the ridge estaurant, which advertises oysters with crab imperial, and the airbank ackle store, which sells tackle, ice and bait.
cross the harbor from urphy's slip are a handful of skipjacks  a vanishing fleet of traditional oyster dredge boats and the last commercial sailing fishing fleet in orth merica.
ow, it stands alone in the shadow of the ent arrows ridge.
t the lessing of the leet, where for decades t. ary's residents have marked the beginning of the season, there were hardly any workboats to sanctify this year.
he t. ary's ounty yster estival, one of the heseapeake ay's largest celebrations, is being held this weekend, ct. 16-17, at the fairgrounds in eonardtown, d.
nd at the recent t. ary's ounty yster estival, which draws thousands and crowns a national shucking champion, organizers had to ship in shellfish from exas and ouisiana.
cientists blame these algae for creating ``bad water'' where fish and crabs cannot breathe.
``e're desperate,'' gnes rown said one morning this fall when people kept calling and knocking on their door, looking for oysters, and the couple spent much of the night driving to deliver bait.
he animals, which are blamed for thousands of acres of vanished wetland statewide, have been eliminated from their former stronghold in the lackwater ational ildlife efuge, officials said.
nd scientists are exploring the mass introduction of a hinese oyster to replace the vanishing native breed.
ad wasn't able to fill his orders.''
ut first, the bay cleanup bureaucracy worked on official water standards  figuring out exactly how clean the bay should be.
he key issue in the legal action to be filed ednesday is nitrogen, which along with phosphorus serves as food for huge algae blooms in the bay.
ucker rown pulled off his rubber apron and gloves to check on the empty shells pouring out as his wife walked in with a clipboard of orders.
avid hillips a waterman from ittman, d., said he welcomes any effort to increase the oyster supply.
lthough nutria remain in the state, aryland is being lauded as a rare success story in the government's fight against the pest, which has colonized states from the hesapeake ay to regon.
hen the deadline came in 2000, they had fallen short.
``here's really about two months of the year when this is a pleasant occupation,'' endrot said.
fter struggling for decades against an orange-toothed rodent that is eating the state's marshes, authorities in aryland have claimed their first major victory over the nutria.
``he little shells or carcasses are about all you see,'' enkins said.
ll it took was two years, $2 million and 15 trappers working in chest-deep muck here on the astern hore.
``ll that is lacking is the political will to get on with the job.''
alfway through a 10-year program to save the hesapeake ay, political leaders are acknowledging that the vaunted cleanup is faltering and are calling for major changes midstream.
``t didn't happen because people were afraid that we didn't have the numbers right.''
he new agreement, an attempt to jump-start the effort, made more sweeping promises.
hat would be a major increase over current funding for the bay, which arner estimated at $230 million annually.
ep. ayne ilchrest, -d., doesn't want to wait for 2010.
or centuries, the hesapeake has been synonymous with oysters.
"o one here is oystering anymore," he said, shaking his head before adding a footnote.
he idea is to jump-start the massive cleanup effort, which critics say has been bogged down because of excessive bureaucracy and insufficient funding.
he lawsuit, a copy of which was released uesday, accuses the federal agency of dragging its feet as sewage plants across the region pollute the bay's waters.
``f something goes wrong, what's any worse than what we've got?''
he regional financing authority was proposed late last year by a panel of experts chaired by former irginia ov.
till, some observers, including ill atuszeski, who formerly oversaw the 's hesapeake cleanup effort, worry that lawsuits might bog down the process further.
lmost 200 million oysters have been planted since 2001, officials said.
``e've made only modest progress,'' ebecca anmer, head of the  bay program, conceded in a recent interview.
ilchrest wants legislation that would force the cleanup to spend less time on bureaucracy, as well as stronger regulations and punishment for those who pollute, he said.
o answer such questions fully might take many years of research, according to reports by the ational cademy of ciences and a trio of federal agencies: the ..
``ore of the same is asking for trouble.''
``t's a beautiful concept in a sense because it's brought commercial interests and environmental interests together,'' said illiam oldsborough, a senior scientist at the hesapeake ay oundation.
ll the players were at the table last month at fisheries commission meeting in which conservationists pressed the agency to limit the menhaden catch.
inter in the marsh, while often frigid, turned out to be the easy season.
cientists say the rest were killed by recent cold winters or by a decline in food, as so much of the marsh already was eaten.
ut lined up in ogwood arbor are four majestic skipjacks growing old very, very gracefully, their massive white sails lashed to the masts.
ehind schedule; pollution continues to cause large areas of ``bad water'' lacking enough oxygen.
he effects are deeply felt in t. ary's, where so much of life once revolved around oysters.
ut at the current rate, the nitrogen goal won't be met until 2038, and problems with oxygen-poor areas haven't changed.
rom the ent arrows, they are a quick jaunt to the far side of the hesapeake, heading south and east on oute 50, down the thumb print of land dangling between the bay and the tlantic.
his route is frequently clogged with traffic headed toward the tlantic oast and aryland's astern hore in the summer months, but fewer people stop to explore the other stretch of coast, along the hesapeake ay.
t is possible, too, to celebrate the season with a quieter sojourn, steering clear of the crowded festivals and venturing into sleepier coastal communities.
ut algae and sediment cloud the water, blocking sunlight.
imilar scenes are unfolding these days up and down the hesapeake ay, where the annual oyster season is becoming an endangered tradition.
utria were introduced there when a few of the outh merican animals either escaped or were released from a federal fur research project in 1943.
bout half of the refuge's marshland, a crucial pollution filter that scientists call the ``kidneys'' of the hesapeake, had become open water by the 1990s.
ut the annual good cheer surrounding the season is waning.
s it turned out, the nutria death toll had been much lower than they expected, since early speculation was that 50,000 ``nutes'' were in the refuge.
or the bulrush, and the numerous species of birds, fish and mammals that lived in the bulrush marshes, the news wasn't so good.
n the past two years, the rowns have shifted more and more to buying from the ulf of exico.
he nine watermen at the lunts ar site fared better, collecting 97 bushels.
ome environmentalists say this planning marathon was actually stalling to allow politicians to avoid changes that would anger farmers and sewage customers.
oday, oystermen use motorboats more than skipjacks, and they employ other methods, too, like hand-tonging and diving.
`` wouldn't hold it up as a success story, put it that way,'' said ecologist obert owarth of ornell niversity.
he blame is laid on a bureaucracy that spent the first half of the 10-year window on a marathon planning process.
said oby ascon, director of government affairs for mega rotein orp., which produces oil and feed from menhaden and is the largest employer in irginia's orthern eck.
ithout roots to hold it, in many places the mud simply washed away.
ears of paltry oyster harvests have left ill eck, a waterman on aryland's astern hore for 21 of his 39 years, wondering if the business will exist by the time his 9-year-old son reaches adulthood.
ith the nutria gone, the marsh is starting to look the way it did 70 years ago, officials said.
``hen 2010 gets here,  guess it'll be 2020.''
t the height of the season, shuckers line up in the oyster house, don rugged work gloves and pry open the shells, shucking hundreds an hour (they get paid by the pound).
he hesapeake ay oundation assesses the bay's overall health annually and rates it on a 100-point scale.
he bass spawn in the bay and are favorites of gourmets and recreational anglers, who bring the bay area about $500 million a year.
he new way of thinking comes after the numbers of cod, scallops and oysters have declined precipitously.
ith nearly half the time gone, most of the efforts are still in the planning stages, and aker said his organization has lost patience with the .
illions of nutria are in that swampy state, and trappers routinely match the catch at lackwater, about 8,300, in a couple of days.
``t took us over an hour to catch a bushel.''
r maybe, once again, they'll think of something new with which to patch their business together.
onetheless, the commercial fishery business  the packing and shipping that put hesapeake ay oysters on the map  has all but collapsed.
ll noted some signs of progress: a new ``flush tax'' to improve sewer facilities in aryland and rivers in ennsylvania that have been reopened to migrating fish.
he foundation already is suing irginia over what it believes were lax pollution permits issued for a sewage plant in nancock and a hilip orris industrial plant.
or those trying to clean the bay, the problem is that nitrogen comes from everywhere, including from animal manure that washes off farm fields and from leaky septic systems.
dward . endell (), the council's new chairman.
overnment officials also tried to make nutria into a dinner-table delicacy.
rownfields (areas with polluted soil) ... y 2010, rehabilitate and restore 1,050 brownfield sites to productive use ... 414 completed, 636 to go
``here really hasn't been a noticeable improvement,'' said enise reitburg, a senior scientist at the mithsonian nvironmental esearch enter in dgewater, d.
taff researcher obbye ratt contributed to this report.
n 2005, led by the rmy orps of ngineers, the two states are expected to release a draft nvironmental mpact tatement evaluating oyster recovery.
hat, too, failed: eople who will eat nutria are pretty much the same people who eat muskrat  not much of a mass market.
he events spotlighting oysters in ctober and ovember unfold like oysters on the half shell  by the dozen.
oday he is president of a eesburg, a.-based anglers' group, the ational oalition for arine onservation.
bout a third of the menhaden caught in the nited tates are caught in irginia and off the orth arolina coast, the two ast oast states that allow menhaden processing.
he menhaden  an oily, inedible, bony little fish  is the basis of this country's second-largest commercial fishing industry.
n the past couple of years, ussell again has started attending meetings of the federal tlantic tates arine isheries ommission and has reunited with advocate friends during hesapeake ay fishing trips.
`` never thought 'd be back fighting this fight,'' said ick ussell, a os ngeles writer who was fishing for striped bass off artha's ineyard in the 1980s when he was sucked into the striper movement.
en inman was living in avannah, a., when he joined the fight to limit the striped bass catch 20 years ago.
ond was cleaning out his skipjack, the ister aybe, with a vision of running his own tours in the summer and hauling down to lorida come winter.
or the nutria, which resemble waddling beavers with naked tails, the area turned out to be a garden spot.
he festival features oysters in every imaginable combination: raw, steamed, fried or ockefeller; stewed in chowder or mixed with cocktail sauce; or served with a swig of beer in a shot glass.
t features a giant raw oyster bar, cooking demonstrations, live music and an oyster-shucking competition.
n a recent unday morning, the harbor was peaceful, with only a few watermen cleaning and fixing their boats.
hen there's the bay they know  sickly and murky and perhaps getting worse.
t the height of oyster season, which began ct. 1 and runs through the end of arch, arris' rolls out an all-you-can-eat buffet, featuring oysters served seven different ways.
n a crystal clear afternoon, the light air hinting of fall, the iss randy motored up to a dock on the ent arrows in rasonville, d., in front of ..
enerations of watermen worked long winter days gathering them; shuckers spent nights cracking them open; families scalded, fried, steamed and ate them.
ny remaining animals  blessed with an ability to produce more than 10 young in a year  would then quickly repopulate.
ast aston and t. ichaels, ilghman sland is one of those flecks, set on the tip of a peninsula connected to the mainland by a drawbridge across napp's arrows.
is book ``triper ars: n merican ish tory'' will be released next year.
e said the hesapeake officials had been told to wait until after last fall's national elections to launch their efforts.
inally, this week, they got a shipment.
here were huge expanses of a marsh plant they love, called three-square bulrush.
he small flecks of black that mark them on a map can persuade those short on time or unwise in the ways of the bay to save the detour for another day.
`` think it's a great opportunity,'' said hillips, who hopes such efforts will save his profession.
hen individual jurisdictions were to write detailed plans for cleaning up each tributary.
arvests declining sharply, falling 92% between 2000 and 2004
hillips drove his boat 20 miles to mory ollow, a nearly two-hour trip, to participate.
he trappers would act like a conquering army, slowly taking territory in a west-to-east march that was guided by  equipment.
utria act like a ``mammalian lawn mower,'' in the words of scientist obert homas, a professor at oyola niversity in ew rleans  eating the plants, roots and all, and leaving huge stretches of bare mud.
rom 1920 to 1970, before the oyster began its rapid decline, the industry contributed $65 million annually to the state of aryland, a figure that didn't include the tourism it attracted.
t. atrick reek curls around the rowns' land, with family and friends living along both shores.
aking handfuls at a time, uth flung the oysters back into the water.
n ednesday morning, shuckers stood on wooden boxes, spraying mud as they pried open oysters, dropping the slippery meat into dripping pails.
ut what happens to the data collected on the quarius is totally new, a small part of an ongoing revolution in how humans manage marine life.
ut when nutria became difficult to find, trappers decided the rodent wasn't worth their time.
bout 8,300 nutria were killed during the eradication, which officials said was planned like a military campaign, using lobal ositioning ystem equipment.
uthorities first offered rewards to trappers who caught nutria: $1.50 apiece.
nd on the otomac  famous for its yster ars five or six decades ago, when shots were fired over fishing rights and fast boats slipped past the authorities at night  little or no harvest is anticipated this year.
n return, state officials promised to open up the oyster bars periodically, particularly around the holidays when demand is higher.
hey were designed to be agile to make multiple quick passes over an oyster bed, dragging dredges behind them.
`` don't think it's the right message to send.''
``t's sort of like a whack-a-mole game,'' said teve endrot, the epartment of griculture official in charge of lackwater's trapping efforts.
erald aliles, who led a committee that studied the bay cleanup last year.
`` think their process would benefit from a little more deliberation,'' said oy iller, administrator of fisheries for the elaware ivision of ish and ildlife.
"ee," he said, picking up one in a fluid motion and knocking it with a quick tap against the pile, making a hollow thunk.
nce touted as a national model, the cleanup effort has unraveled into what some environmentalists call a bureaucratic farce.
uilt at the peak of the oyster rush, in the late 1890s and early years of the 20th century, skipjacks are light, inexpensive boats that can navigate the shallow waters of the bay.
obert . hrlich r. () has been a vocal proponent of the sian oyster, not to make a decision as scheduled early next year.
overnment regulators had set population targets for each species and type separately, aiming only to maintain certain numbers.
n aryland, authorities say they want to slowly expand their nutria-free zone to include the rest of the astern hore, where tens of thousands more nutria lurk between the hesapeake ay ridge and cean ity.
et not everyone left with big bundles of oysters aturday.
anmer, the 's bay director, defended the work, saying it's been slow but necessary for all the cooperating agencies to buy in.
e said if the scientists don't start putting the non-native oyster into aryland waters soon, someone else could throw some overboard.
t is used in a variety of products from cattle feed to vitamin supplements.
ut scientists believe there are many potential downsides  even beyond the dinner-table prospects of an oyster that can resemble an orange portobello mushroom cap.
he consequences are even more troubling for watermen, for whom the bay provides both a livelihood and cultural touchstone.
levon ilghman has been working at arrison's since he was a boy watching his parents shuck oysters there.
illiam . aker, the environmentalist group's president, spoke from a podium emblazoned with the slogan ``top the elay.
nce the water froze, the nutria couldn't swim away, and trappers could shoot them by the dozens on the ice.
hat plan, if authorized by  leaders, could be implemented by spring, agency officials said uesday.
he plans, due by 2002, still aren't finished.
``e should look at menhaden as a keystone of the hesapeake ay, rather than a little, oily, bony thing out of which you can make cat food,'' said avid esta, director of the ceans rogram at the nvironmental efense und.
arther down the road, aptain uddy arrison, who owns the company, also runs the hesapeake ouse, offering old-fashioned seafood dining and lodging overlooking the bay.