he announcement comes just two weeks after erck pulled its painkiller, ioxx, which is in the same class of drugs as extra, from the market because a study showed that the risk of heart attacks doubled for patients who had taken ioxx for 18 months or longer.
erck officials said last week its latest research showed an increased risk of heart attack and other cardiovascular complications in patients who took ioxx for at least 18 months.
erck & o. removed ioxx from use hursday after new study results showed increased risk of heart attacks and stroke in people who used it for longer than 18 months.
lthough the .. ood and rug dministration said the risk of an individual patient having a heart attack or stroke related to ioxx is small, the agency also said "there appear to be significant safety concerns."
to the risk of heart attack or stroke," he said in an interview.
eavily advertised as an arthritis drug, ioxx was pulled from the market last week after its maker said a study showed it doubled the risk of heart attack and stroke.
t was not stopped earlier because trial results did not find increased risk in the first 18 months of the trial, the  said.
itzerald said he thinks the problem of increased risk also applies to fizer's elebrex and extra.
or five days erck had been struggling with what to do with frightening new data that showed that long-term use of their $2.5 billion arthritis drug ioxx doubled the risk of heart attacks and strokes, confirming concerns raised by earlier studies.
ioxx was approved after trials held under the auspices of the ood and rug dministration showed it to be effective (which it was).
(n riday, fizer nc. issued a warning that its ox-2 drug extra may increase cardiovascular risk for some patients.)
erck removed ioxx from sale ept. 28 after seeing an increased risk of "serious cardiovascular events," the  said, including heart attacks and strokes.
ast week, ilmartin and im still said that none of the earlier ioxx studies, by either the company or others, convincingly showed increased heart and stroke risk from the drug.
erck took the drastic step of pulling ioxx because its research showed it caused increased risk of heart attack.
he issue of drug advertising directly aimed at consumers was thrust into the news recently when erck withdrew its arthritis painkiller ioxx from the market, citing studies indicating a risk of heart attacks or strokes.
ioxx, elebrex and extra are the only three drugs in a class known as ox-2 inhibitors.
he ood and rug dministration silenced one of its drug experts who raised safety concerns weeks before erck & o. yanked the blockbuster drug ioxx due to increased risks for heart attack and strokes, the chairman of the enate inance ommittee said hursday.
ut articles released ednesday by the ew ngland ournal of edicine say ioxx may not be the only drug of its type that raises the heart and stroke risk.
fizer says there is no evidence that its drugs have problems similar to ioxx because they are chemically different.
lthough extra is not approved for use for surgery patients, fizer said that its studies had shown that general surgery patients  as opposed to bypass patients  were not at higher risk for heart attacks.
n  official said the agency would have no immediate comment.
ith ioxx, researchers had been warning about the drug's possible cardiovascular risks since 2000, only a year after it was approved by the .
fizer nc. warned doctors on riday that one of its bestselling painkillers, extra, might increase the risk of a heart attack or stroke in coronary artery bypass surgery patients.
he conclusion raham presented in rance was revised: "his and other studies cast serious doubt on the safety" of ioxx doses higher than 25 mg. per day.
fizer said it is already conducting research into whether extra increases the risk of heart attacks in people taking the drug for chronic pain.
erck's decision to withdraw ioxx cast suspicion on the safety of drugs in that class.
"he question for the  is whether there should be a general warning, particularly for patients who are at high risk of cardiovascular disease," the doctor said.
ut the .. ood and rug dministration said similar prescription drugs were safe.
ata from a company study found then that users had four times as many heart attacks and strokes as those who used another painkiller.
" believe this is a class effect," he said, meaning that the problem also applies to elebrex and fizer's newer, similar drug, extra, which remain on the market.
`` looked at it and concurred immediately that the trial should stop,'' aron said.
ilmartin was clear that the trial should be halted and that the drug might have to be taken off the market.
s a result, they said, there was no reason to stop the advertising campaign.
he  said last week after ioxx was withdrawn that the problems were unique to that drug.
ut some doctors say this group of drugs may work in a way that increases the risk of heart problems for some patients, and they point to this latest information as additional reason for concern.
he results of that study came on the heels of an earlier study that showed a greater number of heart attacks in patients taking ioxx, although there were fewer stomach ulcers and bleeding.
ong-term studies on extra, which was approved by the  in 2001, are not yet available.
fter the presentation in rance, raham discussed the issue with his supervisor, the statement said.
he  said that raham decided to revise his abstract conclusion.
ven as erck was deciding to withdraw the drug, there were medical experts arguing that it should not.
n addition to extra, fizer also makes elebrex, the best-selling -2 drug on the market.
n a separate report also released by the medical journal, r. ric opol of the leveland linic chastises the  for not requiring erck to do studies investigating heart problems with ioxx when hints of them first appeared years ago, and for allowing the company to blitz consumers with  ads touting the drug.
he second article in the medical journal, by r. ric opol of the leveland linic, criticizes the  for not requiring erck to do studies investigating heart problems with ioxx even though hints of danger appeared years ago.
"fter that discussion, it was r. raham's decision to revise the abstract.
hen erck voluntarily pulled ioxx from the market on ept. 30, the  was asked to roll the 's handling of that controversy into its inquiry.
even weeks before erck & o. pulled the arthritis drug ioxx off the market because of safety concerns, federal drug regulators downplayed the significance of scientific findings citing the increased risks, documents released hursday show.
atients on ioxx for arthritis or other conditions should be getting letters from their doctors, although they can call them now.
esults of clinical studies with one drug in a given class do not necessarily apply to other drugs in the same class, the  said.
hat could have made many less likely to prescribe it.
heir doctors can prescribe other ox-2 inhibitors, or try drugs such as ibuprofen.
itzerald also challenged fizer's contention that no science shows increased risk from elebrex.
he numbers were small, in part because people with heart disease had been screened out of the trial, but the trend had been worrisome and the latest data were striking: fter 18 months on the drug, the ioxx group was clearly having more heart problems than the placebo group and the rate of difference was accelerating.
he painkillers known as -2 inhibitors, which include extra and ioxx, have been widely prescribed to people suffering with arthritis.
" believe this is a class effect," he said, meaning the problem that caused ioxx to be removed also could apply to elebrex and fizer's newer and similar drug, extra.
r. avid . raham, associate director for science in the  rug enter's ffice of rug afety, told enate investigators he faced stiff resistance within the regulatory agency to his findings.
ut taking the drug off the market, he said, was the right thing, too.
he drug was not pulled at that point.
en. harles rassley, -owa, who has launched an investigation into the ood and rug dministration's handling of ioxx said one of the questions will be whether ``a too cozy relationship between the  and drug companies is getting in the way of public safety.''
hough the new study was more comprehensive than past research because it looked at patients over the course of three years, research since ovember 2000 has suggested that those who take ioxx face a heart attack risk four to five times greater than those who take older, equally effective arthritis treatments such as ibuprofen and naproxen.
leveland linic cardiologist ric opol, an early critic of the drug, estimates ioxx may have caused 30,000 to 100,000 heart attacks and strokes, many of them ``preventable'' because patients could have taken other drugs.
hat is one reason doctors and patients welcomed the new s known as ox-2 inhibitors  ioxx, elebrex and extra  as they started entering the market in the 1990s.
n a separate report released by the ew ngland ournal, r. ric opol of the leveland linic chastises the  for not requiring erck to do studies investigating heart problems with ioxx when hints of them first appeared years ago.
raham planned to present the study ug. 25, but he immediately hit resistance from his supervisors, who said they were too preliminary.
he next day surprised  officials learned the drug would be pulled.
straeneca, a ritish-based company, said that it was unfazed by the critics and that the ioxx backlash would have no effect on its own consumer advertising for exium or other drugs.
n the meeting, top  officials were shown preliminary slides from the colon polyp study and were told by erck that the drug would be withdrawn.
he called itzerald's contention "an interesting theory," but said, "there is no evidence" of increased risk of heart problems among the 75 million mericans who have taken elebrex.
he called itzerald's contention "an interesting theory," but said, "there is no evidence" of increased risk of heart problems among the 75 million mericans who have taken elebrex.
fficials of the ood and rug dministration said riday that a meeting about these issues will occur in anuary.
he original report from one study involving elebrex found no increased risk of heart problems, but it covered only six months of a year-long study, according to the cardiologist.
e had been railing publicly for some time about the absence of long-term cardiovascular risk studies on painkillers, a situation that he said made selecting the right drug a ``total crapshoot.''
fizer said both elebrex and extra will remain on the market and that there's no reason they shouldn't.
fizer said a clinical study involving more than 1,500 patients showed that those who had undergone bypass surgery and had taken extra intravenously and orally were at higher risk for heart attacks.
tudies done five years ago when elebrex and erck & o.'s ioxx were approved suggest that the same mechanism that inhibits inflammation and makes the drugs easier on the stomach than traditional painkillers also blocks a substance that prevents heart problems, according to r. arret itzerald, a niversity of ennsylvania cardiologist.
tudies done five years ago when fizer's elebrex and erck & o.'s ioxx were approved suggest the same mechanism that inhibits inflammation and makes them easier on the stomach than traditional painkillers also blocks a substance that prevents heart problems, according to r. arret itzerald, chairman of pharmacology at the niversity of ennsylvania.
raham responded to his supervisor's suggested revisions in an ug. 13 e-mail that: "'ve gone about as far as  can without compromising my deeply-held conclusions about this safety question.
raham told enate investigators that he believed the  was trying to block publication of his findings noting the higher risk.
thers within the agency suggested raham's conclusion was too strongly worded, given the  had not added such warnings to ioxx labels.
"e did so voluntarily," the agency said.
e said he sees no reason for people using elebrex to stop.
y contrast, ioxx made $2.5 billion for erck last year.
wo newer arthritis drugs of the same type are waiting for marketing approval in the nited tates, but iller said they will not be released without more review of their cardiovascular risks.
nd researchers writing in the ew ngland ournal of edicine voiced their concerns as well with such drugs as fizer's popular elebrex.
hen eaton faxed him the ``unblinded'' data, the signal was clear: ithin the small population of people suffering from cardiovascular disease, the number from the ioxx group after 18 months of study was twice as high as the placebo group  15 heart attacks or strokes per 1,000 patients per year, versus 7.5 for the sugar pill.
``he curves show not even a hint of a detrimental effect for 18 months,'' and even after that the risks did not appear that large.
ess than a week after erck & o. yanked its popular ioxx arthritis drug off the market, the ew ngland ournal of edicine voiced strong concerns ednesday about the safety of fizer's bestselling elebrex.
raham presented his findings in rance ug. 25, but already had encountered the resistance from supervisors.
raham, scheduled to present those findings in late ugust during an epidemiology conference in rance, said he ran into resistance when the  reviewed his abstract.
r. aul eligman, acting director of the 's ffice of rug afety, said the agency did not pressure osholder to change his conclusion.
r were they persuaded to do so by erck's advertising?
ilmartin said he agreed the drug should be pulled but wanted to take a decision of that magnitude to his board of directors who concurred when they met the next day.
r. avid raham, associate director for science in the drug safety division of the ood and rug dministration, by early ugust had notified his supervisors that a study of ioxx showed patients on the starting dose had 50 percent greater risk of cardiac arrest than those on competitor elebrex.
alson said that his agency met often with erck to discuss earlier troubling ioxx studies, and said that ``we insisted that we needed more information about the cardiovascular risks.''
``e did the right things based on what we knew at the time,'' he said.
hat afternoon, aron called his contact at erck to say that the drug presented an unacceptable risk of cardiovascular damage.
he trial whose results pulled ioxx off the market was designed to check how well 25 mg of ioxx did in preventing recurrence of polyps in the colon.
"here's no evidence we're aware of the other ox-2 drugs have similar effects, but we don't really have studies that are long enough (to know)," iller said.
elebrex earned $1.5 billion in the first six months of this year, she said.
ritics noted the role that advertising and marketing had played a role in the drug's being widely prescribed to patients who might do just as well with ibuprofen or other inexpensive over-the-counter remedies.
"ut there are other things they can learn that are nonpharmacological."
hen the recall occurred, it came about because of a major clinical study sponsored by erck that tracked 2,600 patients for almost three years to find out if ioxx helped prevent colon polyps.
he  had no comment ednesday on the report.
uch commercials show how far the ood and rug dministration has slipped in enforcing its own rules.
"s my investigative staff continues looking into how the ood and rug dministration handles drug safety issues, particularly with antidepressants and ioxx, a picture is emerging of an agency that can't see the forest for the trees," said en. harles rassley, -owa, chairman of the enate's inance ommittee.
erck critics, and there are many, say the company had plenty of warning.
hen erck voluntarily withdrew ioxx,  officials said heart problems were unique to that drug and that the mechanism underlying them wasn't known.
n addition, in 2003 and earlier this year, they found that more people in the ioxx group were having cardiovascular events than in the placebo group.
he  needs to give more guidance in using the remaining -2 inhibitors, itzgerald said in the ournal article.
itzerald said the ood and rug dministration "has a responsibility to provide informed, unbiased information rapidly to advise doctors and their patients as to how to respond to the withdrawal of ioxx."
ong-term studies are not yet available on extra, which was approved in 2001.
raham submitted a revised study to the  ept. 30.
o why is erck recalling the drug now?
``t's not that we're unaware of the consequences, but it's a deep-seated belief that if you do the right thing, rewards will follow,'' he said of the decision to pull the drug.
y then, erck had notified the  that it needed an emergency meeting that afternoon, and asked that top officials be present.
eaton immediately called aron, who was conducting the trial with a grant from erck, and explained the problem.
erck, which knew ioxx was in competition with similar drugs, then conducted further trials, largely to find out if ioxx could be legitimately recommended for other conditions.
ome of them have an anti-clotting effect that make patients more likely to bleed.
nd the  says that, despite the controversy accompanying the withdrawal of ioxx, it has no plans to place new curbs on such ads.
lthough that study's findings did not cause ioxx to be withdrawn, iller and opez-endez said the results put ioxx lower on their list for prescribing.
he 's own study of the ioxx safety issue has become mired in controversy.
hat report is not expected for months.
n ednesday, the uropean edicines gency in ondon announced it would review all drugs of this type.
n ednesday, the uropean edicines gency in ondon announced it would review all drugs of this type.
ioxx and other ox-2 inhibitors like elebrex had been promoted as wonder drugs, since they provided pain relief to arthritis sufferers without causing stomach problems, but now ioxx is off the market and the others are under a cloud.
ut orthwestern niversity rheumatologist homas chnitzer argued for ditching ioxx entirely because erck's scientists could not explain why the drug started causing heart attacks after 18 months.
he ox-2 inhibitors cause fewer gastrointestinal side effects, including upset stomach, heartburn and ulcers, than other pain-relieving drugs.
hat means ioxx results cannot automatically be extended to elebrex and extra, which are in the ox-2 classification with ioxx but are not identical to it.
he medical journal published their reports ednesday on the nternet  more than two weeks ahead of their planned publication to help inform doctors and patients.
" think the recommendation about high dose rofecoxib is unnecessary and particularly problematic since  funded this study and avid's travel to rance to present it," nne . rontell, deputy director of the 's ffice of rug afety, wrote in an ug. 12 e-mail.
is supervisors within the  told him to suggest that children use such medications "with caution," osholder told the ongressional panel.
n the e-mail, rontell suggested that raham defer his presentation in favor of a journal article so dissenting scientists _ including within the  _ could comment.
e compared it to the  last ebruary of not allowing another doctor to present his findings that antidepressants increased the risk of suicidal behavior in children.
o far, he said, that information has come almost entirely from erck and elebrex.
he  safety officer in charge of the report, avid raham, concluded that ioxx posed much greater cardiovascular risk than the other major drug in its class, elebrex.
he 's announcement on ept. 30 did not include the 50 percent higher risk data.
he research team's original conclusion said that high doses of ioxx should not be prescribed or used.
"hen there are other alternatives, why risk trying to use the drug that might have elevated risk?"
he lab director's message came in two parts: the experts were divided over whether erck had to pull ioxx off the market, but im thought they should do it anyway.
``ook eter, we're going to make this decision based on what's in the best interest of science and patient safety,'' ilmartin recalled saying.
 couldn't see erck saying we're going to market a drug with a safety problem.''
" think it's good we are looking at safety," ilson said.
he experts agreed unanimously that the trial had to stop.
all the doctor who prescribed it and talk about alternatives.
hey may review patients' conditions to see if they still need medicine, she and iller said.
ut the data was not definitive, and erck, which even critics say is one of the most responsible drug companies, repeatedly reassured the medical and financial communities that ioxx was safe.
hese studies also were designed to answer questions about cardiovascular risk raised by earlier less conclusive research.
hat was when the four members of the colon polyp trial's ata and afety onitoring oard, an independent panel of specialists hired to catch harmful developments in the trial, received heart attack and stroke data for the previous six months.
he solution is not a total ban on advertising, as some suggest, but rather more clinical trials of drugs, aimed specifically at determining effectiveness as well as long-term safety.
ong-term studies are not yet available on extra, approved in 2001.
he  could help solve these problems not only by enforcing its own rules but by requiring doctors and hospitals to report ``adverse events'' when patients use drugs.
he medical journal published two reports on the issue ednesday on the nternet _ more than two weeks ahead of their planned print publication _ to help inform doctors and patients considering whether to stop using the drugs.
riting in the medical journal, r. arret itzerald, chief of pharmacology at the niversity of ennsylvania, said studies suggest the same mechanism that makes the drugs easier on the stomach than traditional painkillers also blocks a substance that prevents heart problems.
``unning away from your problems, denial, is the worst possible choice,'' said nthony abino, professor of business law at t. ohn's niversity.
"either erck nor the  fulfilled its responsibilities to the public ...
he turbulence outside the aircraft was an echo of the corporate tempest leading up to their trip.
"y stomach was very unsettled," said artin, a 26-year-old mother in radell, ..
``here was so much at stake for everyone involved.
eople die every day waiting for new treatments.
``here was so much denial over there,'' said avid oskowitz, senior pharmaceutical analyst for riedman, illings, amsey o.
his took nearly a week, during which aron took precautions to guard against leaks of negative information and insider trading of erck shares.
or patients on blood thinners such as oumadin, the combination could be highly risky without proper supervision.
uke niversity cardiologist obert aliff argued strenuously on one teleconference for keeping the drug on the market with a much stronger warning label.
-mails released hursday show ohn enkins, director of the ffice of ew rugs, on ug. 13 said raham's findings include "pretty strong language."
or people too worried about the risks to continue taking prescription medications, he suggested over-the-counter drugs like ylenol, at least until they have time to consult with their doctor.
he 's opportunity to act independently on ioxx ended on ept. 27, when the fax came from erck asking for an urgent meeting with senior officials.
nd older nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs such as ibuprofen and naproxen, typically called s, cause gastrointestinal bleeding in some patients.
nstead the  strongly supported the erck decision to use three placebo-controlled trials in healthy people to test whether the drug was protective against prostate and colon cancer and colon polyps and also to study cardiovascular risk.
hen the agency determines a drug company has made a misleading ad, it first issues a warning letter, then imposes a fine if the ad is not pulled.
nother study  this one released in ugust on a review of more than 1 million  patients  found a three-fold risk of cardiovascular incidents in patients taking 25 mg or more ioxx, opez-endez said.
ioxx was erck's fourth top seller, and they knew their decision would be extremely harmful to the company.
he study found that high doses of ioxx, known as rofecoxib, tripled risks of heart attacks and sudden cardiac death.
f there is a lesson to be learned from the ioxx withdrawal, surely it is the need for renewed attention to evidence-based medicine and evidence-based drug prescription as well.
hen aron and the erck people left the call, freeing the four safety panel members to talk openly about the latest unsettling data.
ut the study was halted when it indicated a heightened risk of cardiovascular complications.
erck & o. said its surprise decision hursday to withdraw the arthritis drug ioxx  used by about 2 million people worldwide  was driven by recent evidence that the drug's adverse side effects outweighed any potential benefits.
ioxx, whatever its safety risks, was hardly unique as a prescription drug that became a best seller on the strength of advertising aimed directly at consumers.
his is a safety issue, but also an economic one.
``his morning erck is announcing a voluntary worldwide withdrawal of ioxx,'' ilmartin began.
hrough this process, erck discovered that ioxx did indeed carry a small but unacceptable risk of cardiac problems when used for longer than 18 months.
 look at the full data "reveals signs of increased cardiovascular risk," he writes.
ut the ioxx withdrawal should inspire some sharper thought about what happens to drugs once they have been approved, and whether the  should have the authority to mandate more thorough, ongoing, long-term testing.
ioxx and a similar drug from fizer nc., elebrex, have been touted as ``super-aspirins'' in numerous  commercials that have downplayed their known cardiovascular risks.
omentum was growing for a fresh look at the safety of elebrex and other pain relievers as key researchers, a congressman and uropean regulators said they feared such drugs might raise the risk of heart problems like those blamed on the arthritis medicine ioxx.
ven if the painkiller stayed on the market, sales would almost certainly plummet because its advertising would be restricted and would have to carry a ``black box'' warning about the heart attack risks.
long with the itzerald piece, he ew ngland ournal of edicine also posted a second article on the nternet, two weeks ahead of scheduled publication, signaling a more immediate concern.
itzerald led the studies, which were designed by him but funded by the drug companies.
o she asked her doctor for exium, the "purple pill" that is the nation's most widely advertised prescription drug.
"s a scientific agency,  values open discussion and frank exchange about scientific and medical issues," the agency said in a statement.
he  said such discussions are typical before scientific findings are published.
alson has said, however, that he only saw a short abstract of the study and so could not act on its conclusions, a contention that raham disputes.
he safety officer who conducted it concluded this summer that the drug posed a serious risk.
he company was trying to get at cardiovascular risk, he said, by initiating three clinical trials that would together give important new information on the issue.
"r. raham described an environment where he was 'ostracized,' 'subjected to veiled threats' and 'intimidation,'" epublican en. huck rassley, of owa, said in a statement after inance ommittee investigators interviewed the researcher hursday.
ioxx is a new-generation painkiller, one of several that are (or were) prescribed instead of aspirin or other over-the-counter drugs.
aron said in the next few days, as he presented the data to company officials and some outside erck advisers, he experienced ``no pushback at all.''
n examination of how and why erck reacted offers an unusual look at how safety issues are handled in clinical trials once a drug is on the market and the complex business of weighing risks against benefits.
he four monitors, along with a erck statistician were the only ones with full access to information about the trial, including which patients were getting ioxx and which were getting the placebo.
"(nd)  offered one of the older anti-inflammatories, and she said, ' think 'd rather stay on elebrex.'
y then, im said, he was leaning toward pulling the drug.
ilson at iedmont ospital pointed out that there are alternatives to such medicines, like weight loss and exercise prescribed by a therapist.
e called on the  to change its advice to patients and doctors to reflect the new safety concerns.
alson also said that ioxx safety follow-up was complicated by the fact that it is unethical to give placebos to arthritic patients, because their pain needs treatment.
espite clear beneficiaries like mily artin, though, many medical experts say most patients would do just as well with various cheaper, over-the-counter remedies for indigestion and heartburn, including straeneca's own rilosec  a chemically similar predecessor that no longer requires a prescription and sells for $40 a month or less.
ver the past two weeks he ashington ost had interviewed independent researchers who collected and reviewed the ioxx data, company officials who decided how erck would respond, critics of the drug industry and regulators who, in the end, played almost no role in its recall.
 third trial was studying the drug's effect on colon cancer was also underway.
hey talked first with erck representatives and the principal investigator for the colon polyp trial, ohn aron of artmouth edical chool.
ompetition combined with regulation forced the drug off the market.
s hundreds of patients' groups can attest, there are high costs when the  does not approve drugs quickly, even drugs with serious side effects.
any doctors and patients liked ioxx's track record on gastrointestinal problems, a major source of worry for arthritis patients.
eanwhile, the uropean edicines gency in ondon announced it would review drugs similar to ioxx.
e said the drugs remain a "rational choice" for patients at low risk of cardiovascular problems who have had serious gastrointestinal events (such as bleeding), but he said it would "seem prudent" to avoid them with patients who have or are at risk of cardiovascular disease.
n initial study last year raised similar concerns in the same kinds of patients.
earful of a leak, erck officials waited until the next day, ednesday, to tell international affiliates of the planned withdrawal and asked them to hold off on telling their regulators until the news was made public.
ut he said that the results were ignored and that the  made efforts to silence him.
he national adverse event reporting system that helps the  flag dangerous side effects was of little use in this case because the ailments possibly caused by ioxx  heart attacks and strokes  are so common.
extra is the company's new and faster-acting version of elebrex.
`` thought the risk was going to be larger than it was,'' he said.
ut itzerald suggested that by selectively blocking one of the two substances called prostaglandins that lead to inflammation, these ox-2 inhibitors were sparing the stomach at the expense of the heart.
ut itzerald and colleagues published two studies in 1999 and another in 2001 suggesting that by selectively blocking one of the two substances called prostaglandins that lead to inflammation, these so-called cox-2 inhibitors were sparing the stomach at the expense of the heart.
ioxx was easier on the stomach than aspirin, but it cost more.
he internal e-mail exchange was released by rassley.
id the 20 million mericans who used the drug since its launch in 1999 really have to spend that extra money and, as it turns out, incur a slight extra risk?
e presented that information at a rench conference this summer.
erck lab director im heard the news on when he dialed into his voice mail while driving to work, 7:30 a.m. on ept. 24.
"ost people want a pill to make them better," he said.
e suggested preferential use of rozac, the only drug approved to treat depressed children and _ according to his review _ the one with the lowest risk.
ccording to studies carried out by the aiser amily oundation and others, the pharmaceutical industry's advertising encourages some people to consult doctors, which is a good thing, particularly for those who may not have known they have, say, high cholesterol or blood pressure.
elebrex is the 10th most popular drug in the nited tates, with annual sales of $2.7 billion, up 5 percent in a year, according to  ealth, a company that tracks drug industry trends.
he drugmaker's colon cancer study of 2,600 people was designed to evaluate the effectiveness of the standard 25-milligram dose in preventing a recurrence of colon polyps.
" did have a patient who said, ''ve heard about ioxx,  hear elebrex is next.'
"ut we need to understand that anything strong enough to help you is potentially strong enough to have a side effect."
ut, on the phone call, when im delivered the new, more damaging results, ilmartin's choices were bleak.
e goes on to suggest that raham rework the study to say "something like 'his and other studies suggest an increased risk of (acute myocardial infarction with (ioxx) use and should be considered by prescribers when making individual treatment decisions."
"erck knew it had trouble on its hands and took action.
"he data for elebrex is robust and exceeds, in the length of patients in studies and in the size of studies, the data ioxx has," she said.
"he data for elebrex is robust and exceeds, in the length of patients in studies and in the size of studies, the data ioxx has," she said.
`` was stunned,'' said im who had expected positive results.
ut first, aron needed to get the approval of his steering committee of others involved in the trial.
n ept. 23 the full committee agreed to halt the trial.
``hy didn't they stop the  (direct to consumer) marketing?''
 "picture is emerging of an agency that can't see the forest for the trees," rassley said.
hen you've been going this long you don't expect this kind of phone call,'' ilmartin remembered in an interview soon after the drug was pulled.
" saw the commercial and they showed people talking about immediate and miracle relief," she said.
ne can only speculate, but it may have less to do with side effects outweighing benefits than with legal liabilities outweighing profits.
n ept. 30, the company took the dramatic step of withdrawing the drug, sending the price of its stock into a steep slide that wiped out a quarter of the company's value, a slide from which it has not yet recovered.
ndependent studies of ioxx users continued to add to the questions, and the  began its own review.
ntil the new study, ioxx seemed the best alternative for some patients despite a caution on its label from an earlier study.
"n light of erck's withdrawal of ioxx from the market and other recent news stories examining 's review of the safety and efficacy of anti-depressant drug use by children,  am concerned whether  has been sufficiently aggressive in monitoring drug safety," avis wrote.
fter some initial evidence that the drug might be linked to cardiac disease, the  required erck to attach an additional warning (which was justified).
he withdrawal of ioxx caused erck's market value to sink by almost $27 billion.
he company also issued a warning on riday about an extremely rare and potentially fatal skin reaction to extra.
t the same time, instead of acting as a public watchdog, the ood and rug dministration was busy challenging its own expert and calling his work 'scientific rumor.'"
egulators abroad have also indicated plans to review -2 drugs.
" am concerned whether  has been sufficiently aggressive in monitoring drug safety," avis said.
ioxx was the largest prescription drug withdrawal in history, "but had the many warning signs along the way been heeded, such a debacle could have been prevented," opol wrote.
he whole saga, industry experts said, raises unsettling questions about aggressive consumer marketing of drugs before their long-term safety has been proven.
e led the studies, which were designed by him but funded by the drug companies.
erck launched the effort hoping to create new markets for ioxx, while also laying to rest questions about the drug's connection to heart attacks and strokes.
raham told he ssociated ress that rassley's characterization was accurate.
n a prepared statement, the  said it "values open discussion and frank exchange about scientific and medical issues" and subjects its scientists to "more rigorous" scrutiny than typical scientific peer reviews.
"'ve gone about as far as  can without compromising my deeply held conclusions about this safety question," raham replied in an ug. 13 e-mail.
ut ads also persuade people to spend money on unnecessary drugs, which is a bad thing for their health and for insurance premiums.
t 9 a.m. on ept. 30, ilmartin and im took the stage at the ilton imes quare and faced a room packed with reporters and television cameras.
hey recommended that raham's findings either be submitted to a medical journal for a peer review or presented beside an alternative  opinion.
he  enter for rug valuation and esearch director teven alson said there was discussion of keeping the drug for short-term use, but the company did not think it was practical.
t lunchtime on onday, ept. 27, it was time to make a final decision.
ver the next three days, im and his researchers convened three teleconferences with about 15 outside medical experts to get their advice.
n the seven years since the  lifted longstanding strictures against such ads, prescription drug advertising has grown into a $3.8 billion-a-year business.
've also shared with you the perspectives of my co-authors and  think it's safe to say they share these same conclusions."
``oming to that conclusion, it took our breath way,'' eaton said.
s a result, they alone were in a position to conclude the drug had proven too dangerous for the trial to continue.
ow research lab director eter im and general counsel enneth razier were flying to oston to tell one of the men most responsible for ioxx's success that erck would be pulling the drug in two days.
ll three trials were placebo-controlled and ``blinded'' to investigators, making them the most trusted kind of drug research.
... ou have to have data that the scientific community will accept.''
"e all take reasonable risks in our lives," the physician said.
he  said it followed its standard review process.
ompany spokeswoman aryann aprino described itzerald's article as "an interesting hypothesis" but said that "in terms of the real world, we totally disagree."
r. da opez-endez, a rheumatology specialist at inter aven ospital, said patients should return the ioxx they have.
n 2001, the agency formally warned the company against misleading doctors about those risks, and in 2002, the  required stiffer wording on the drug label.
"ou have one person do extremely well with a drug and on the other it wouldn't work."
onetheless, the agency had agreed with erck that the 2000 study had too many confounding aspects to be definitive.
he same team also was monitoring another erck trial to see if ioxx might help protect against prostate cancer.
ow their wonder drug was suddenly under a cloud and erck officials faced a difficult decision about how to handle the catastrophe.
nformation from the earlier study went on the ioxx label in pril 2002, according to the .
ut while patients need to stop taking ioxx, local physicians said, it is not always easy to decide on a new course of treatment.
ith ioxx coming off the pharmacy shelves, what is a patient who took that drug for pain supposed to do?
fizer's medical director, r. ail awkwell, insisted that its drugs are safe.
fizer's medical director, r. ail awkwell, insisted that its drugs are safe.
elebrex and ioxx have become household names in recent years.
nd an  spokeswoman, rystal ice, said late last week, "here are no additional changes expected at this time in light of the ioxx withdrawal."
"his represents the largest prescription-drug withdrawal in history, but had the many warning signs along the way been heeded, such a debacle could have been prevented," he said.
opol also criticized the  for letting erck blitz consumers with  ads pushing the drug.
t also shows that federal regulators often rely on drug companies to tell them that a product is dangerous.
e thought the concerns, however, would result in more conversations between doctors and patients.
hatever the company's motives, its decision to withdraw ioxx should cast scrutiny on at least two problems inherent in the nation's system for assessing and monitoring drug safety.
 believe there should be a full ongressional review of this case."
ive years ago, itzerald published research "revealing a mechanism" in both ioxx and elebrex that could "predispose people .
hat included patients for whom older s had not controlled pain and patients who have sulfa allergies, of which elebrex and extra can trigger a recurrence, atson linic's iller said.
wenty-seven million prescriptions have been written for elebrex since 1999, aprino said.
he controversy grew riday when rassley asked erck, among other things, about an e-mail provided by raham in which a erck official complained that the  had not lived up to a prior agreement to alert the company before releasing any negative information about its products.
im, razier and ilmartin gathered in the chief executive's conference room at the hitehouse tation, .., campus.
t is in the insurance industry's interest, the 's interest and the federal government's interest  because the federal government is a major provider of health insurance  either to require drug companies to conduct such comparative tests or to set up a neutral agency to do so.
osholder's analysis pointed to increased suicidal thoughts and behaviors among children taking antidepressants well before federal advisers pushed for strident warnings on the drugs.
t midday, im got the general counsel razier on the line and called aymond ilmartin, erck's chairman, president and chief executive.
"here's a good prostaglandin and a bad prostaglandin as far as the heart is concerned," he explained.
``e undertook right away to ask the right questions.''
``e were acting totally consistent with the data we had,'' ilmartin said.
uppressing both, as older painkillers like aspirin and other non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, or  do, helps the heart.
ut then again, he said, ``if an independent committee makes a recommendation like ours, only a fool would tell us to buzz off.''
imply switching to stronger doses of over-the-counter pain medicine is not necessarily the right option, doctors said.
"e've got adequate support for what we say in the ads."
r. . ayes ilson, chief of rheumatology at iedmont ospital in tlanta, urged people taking the drugs not to panic.
ow fizer's warning is sure to fuel the debate about the overall safety of these drugs for all patients.
said opez-endez, medical director of rehabilitation services at inter aven ospital.
he overnment ccountability ffice, an investigative arm of ongress, already has been asked to look into whether the  muzzled another staffer who linked antidepressants to raising the odds of children suffering suicidal tendencies.
erck faces several lawsuits, including a class action filed hursday alleging the company made false and misleading statements about ioxx's safety.
hree erck officials sat up all night ednesday answering e-mails and phone calls from the foreign medical directors.
he company was already facing two class action lawsuits alleging patient harm from ioxx.
aising safety concerns within the agency is "extremely difficult," the 20-year employee said, declining further comment.
rom the beginning of the colon polyp study, the safety monitors had noted an increased rate of hypertension among the ioxx group.
ost clinical trials include independent safety monitors, and their role is little understood but crucial.
rassley's committee is one of three in ongress also scrutinizing the 's actions.
ar from it, the trial confirmed the predictions of erck's harshest critics, who had long complained that the ew ersey manufacturer was closing its eyes to ioxx's problems and improperly pushing a dangerous drug onto consumers with aggressive ads.
that was a major factor in increasing sales, he said.
nd a congressman requested the .. ood and rug dminstration answer questions about the medications used to treat arthritis, diagnosed in more than 49 million people.
eanwhile, epublican ongressman om avis of irginia, who chairs the ouse overnment eform ommittee, sent a letter to 's acting commissioner, r. ester rawford, giving him two weeks to answer questions about how  tracks problems with drug safety, how it dealt with issues surrounding ioxx, and whether the agency will study potential risks in similar drugs.
ut .. ep. om avis of irginia, epublican chairman of the ouse overnment eform ommittee, sent a letter to 's acting commissioner, r. ester rawford, giving him two weeks to answer questions about how  tracks problems with drug safety, how it dealt with issues surrounding ioxx and whether the agency will study potential risks in similar drugs.
lthough the  requires drug makers to demonstrate the superiority of their medications to placebos before they can release them, the agency lets drug companies monitor their own products' dangers after they've reached the shelves.
colnick was the one who had thrown erck's resources behind the creation of ioxx, a painkiller with fewer gastrointestinal side effects than traditional drugs.
xtensive and lengthy pre-approval testing of the sort that would have kept ioxx  and all other drugs  under examination for years ultimately would have harmed more patients than it would have helped.
 sizable group were reluctant to give up a painkiller proven to have fewer gastrointestinal side effects than others and were not convinced the available alternatives were any safer, participants said.
"'m surprised anyone has ever written a prescription for exium."
n testimony before a congressional panel in mid-eptember, ndrew osholder, an  epidemiologist, said his bosses asked him to soften recommendations about antidepressants.
"r. raham described an environment where he was 'ostracized,' 'subjected to veiled threats' and 'intimidation,' " rassley's office said.
"'m trying to prompt guidance from an unbiased source, and it should come urgently."
ince the erck decision, public health advocates and some congressional leaders have asked pointedly why the , the nation's arbiter of drug safety, did not act sooner itself.
o one is arguing that the drug poses serious health risks, beyond a slight chance of side effects like headaches and flatulence.
s they sat at the former lab director's dining table that night, they watched dward colnick, who had been a champion of the drug before he retired, take in the implications of the data and become ``despondent,'' they said.
he 's current hands-off approach to drug companies doesn't just endanger consumers, it hurts investors  who shouldn't be caught by surprise over a drug whose dangers have long been clear.
ich omaselli of dvertising ge agazine said erck spent $78 million advertising ioxx last year, compared to $96 million for elebrex, the 10th most popular drug in the country.
he following editorial appeared in hursday's ashington ost:
hen  gave her the facts," he said.
"exium is no more effective than rilosec," said r. haron evine, an executive with aiser ermanente, the nited tates' largest health maintenance organization.
n its own, this incident does not make a good argument for more stringent  approval procedures.
he two erck & o. executives were somber as the company plane pitched and rolled through the remnants of urricane eanne on the night of ept. 28.
n his view, the new ioxx data quantified the risk and made it manageable.
he last days of ioxx began with edx deliveries on ept. 14.
n a certain sense, erck & o.'s decision to cease selling ioxx, its best-selling painkiller, demonstrates how the peculiarly merican combination of government regulation and private-sector competition can, serendipitously, sometimes work well.
oncern about possible cardiovascular problems associated with ioxx, however, soon arose.
e and other erck scientists pored over the data, looking for flaws but finding none.
"here's a lot of individual variability in medicines," he said.
ithdrawal day started early, with a 4 a.m. e-mail to erck's 60,000 employees alerting them to a major announcement.
urthermore, erck's carefully cultivated image would go out the window if ioxx stayed on the market, he said, because erck ``prides itself on its ethical approach.
he medical journal will publish the new reports in its ct. 21 print edition.
heir less-upsetting impact on the stomach was a plus, particularly with older patients.
: ssociated ress writer inda . ohnson in renton contributed to this report.
 senior epublican senator who released the e-mails said the case was another example of a pattern by the .
acked by a $195 million ad campaign, featuring testimonials from former skater orothy amill and music by the ascals to appeal to aging baby boomers, erck had sold ioxx to more than 20 million mericans since its approval in 1999 and millions more worldwide.
hen mily artin was hospitalized for emergency gallbladder surgery last summer, her doctors found that she had also had acid reflux, causing erosion of her esophagus.
exium is typical of the brand-building trend.
he decision was also sound litigation strategy.
he risk was only slightly greater than average with less than 25 milligrams, she said, adding that the merican ollege of heumatology sent members the results of that presentation days before erck withdrew ioxx.
ut the outside experts, most of whom had done previous work with erck and were offered a fee for their consultation, had surprisingly mixed opinions.
"ver the years, evidence has slowly accumulated consistent with that hypothesis."
nything that smacked of a cover-up would have strengthened the plaintiffs' hands.
espite the criticism directed at his agency, alson remains unapologetic.
ut shutting down just the "good" one raises the risk of high blood pressure, hardening of the arteries and clotting, he reports.
ig government payers such as edicaid or edicare could pay only for expensive new drugs that are demonstrably superior to older, cheaper ones.
``hen  saw the last set of data,  knew we had a tough decision to make,'' said ames eaton, a niversity of innesota biostatistician, who had monitored a dozen other studies but seldom had seen such troubling data.
"e're moving forward undeterred," said im oyne, a spokesman for the company.
nd if courts determine that erck was negligent, the company will pay a heavy price in compensation.
raham was lead author on a research project that studied the records of 1.39 million aiser ermanente patients, including 40,405 treated with fizer's elebrex and 26,748 treated with ioxx.
he also said erck should be alerted before the findings became public "so they can be prepared for extensive media attention that this will likely provoke."
eaton and the three safety committee members spent several days studying the data, then held their regularly scheduled phone conference ept. 17.
ut the number of warning letters has dropped precipitously since the ush administration took power, from 82 in 2000 to 24 in 2003.
ill endrick writes for he tlanta ournal-onstitution.
he second problem is the nation's almost exclusive reliance on drug companies to police the safety and efficacy of their own drugs.
"here's not a simple generic answer," said r. andel iller, atson linic rheumatologist.