uthorities at itape in the est epik province, on 's north-west coast, said the tsunami, that hit the coast west of itape on riday night had wiped out three villages and had almost completely destroyed another, according to an ustralian ssociated ress report sent unday from itape.
  he apua ew uinea () efense orce, the police and health services are on standby to help the victims of a tsunami that wiped out several villages, killing scores of people, on 's remote north-west coast riday night.
he death toll so far from the tsunami that struck the coastline near the town of itape in the est epik (andaun) province riday night, was officially announced 64 and many more people were missing.
gara said reports so far indicated that a community school, government station, atholic mission station and the imas village in the issano area west of itape had been completely destroyed, where 30 people were dead.
nd arapu village had also been completely destroyed, with 11 confirmed deaths and many missing.
ixteen people in the devastated rop village were confirmed dead, and two children had died in the alalo village, which was wiped out.
  ustralia will provide transport for relief supplies and a mobile hospital to apua ew uinea () following riday's tsunami tragedy.
  he death toll in apua ew uinea's () tsunami disaster has climbed to 599 and is expected to rise, a  disaster control officer said unday.
  ustralia unday sent three ir orce 130 ercules aircraft loaded with medical and food supplies on an urgent mission to help survivors of a devastating tsunami which struck apua ew uinea () riday night.
he 10-metre tsunami engulfed the heavily populated villages near itape, 800 kilometers north of ort oresby on riday night - 30 minutes after an undersea earthquake of about 7.0 on the ichter scale in the area.
gara said the population in the area affected by the tsunami was 8,000 to 10,000 people.
"e'll be further liaising with the apua ew uinea government to provide realistic help in those circumstances," he said.
"rime inister ill kate has directed that immediate action be taken to arrange urgent supplies of food, water, shelter and cooking utensils while detailed assessments and reports are being prepared," obert gara, chief secretary of the  government, said aturday in a statement, ustralian ssociated ress reported.
alle said the imas village near the issano lagoon, the arapu village and the rop village had been wiped out, and the alol village had almost been completely destroyed.
any of the villagers are believed to have died instantly as the deadly wall of water struck without warning, sending their homes crashing into the raging torrent.
"hey are scattered all over in the mangroves."
ustralian efense inister an cachlan told reporters in delaide that ustralia's aid agency, usid, estimated the final toll would be well over 1,000, with many thousands injured and as many as 6,000 left homeless.
efense ministry spokesman olonel eith obson said that even when the planes touched down at the airstrip, the defense personnel would still have to use helicopters or road transport to access the stricken villages.
"here are still people out there who are injured that we have not rescued," he said.
owever, he said that how quickly the medical crew could get to work would depend on whether the landing strip at animo was long enough for the 130s to land and the possibility of further earthquakes.
eputy rime inister im ischer described the events in  as "horrific", saying ustralia would do all it could to help  cope with the crisis.
"e will also transport a mobile hospital and associated ustralian efense orce () medical personnel to the disaster area to provide urgent medical assistance to injured victims," owner said aturday in a statement.
gara said the  ed ross had confirmed arrangements to provide food supplies and authorities had asked the ustralian igh ommission in ort oresby for immediate air transport support.
 rime inister ill kate was expected to arrive in itape later unday afternoon to assess the situation.
alle said it was impossible to say how many people were missing.
t arapu 500 people had been confirmed dead.
"t's very rough terrain and our problem is finding an area we can land and get in our equipment," he was quoted by the ustralian ssociated ress as saying.
he tidal wave smashed into the northwestern coastline near the town of itape in est epik province, killing at least 600 people, according to reports reaching here.
owner said the federal government stood ready to consider further requests for assistance from the  government.
eanwhile, rime inister ill kate, ational isaster ervices hairman olin ravertz and ational isaster ervices irector-eneral udwig embu were reported to inspect the affected areas unday.
oreign ffairs inister lexander owner said a oyal ustralian ir orce 130 ercules aircraft currently in  on training exercises would be diverted to deliver relief supplies such as tarpaulins and food to the affected areas in the country's remote north.
"he latest death toll for the district is 599," ickson alle, chairman of district disaster coordinating, was quoted as telling reporters.
he planes were due to arrive unday night and fly out to the devastated region onday morning.
"fficers are now visiting the affected villages and areas to establish the whereabouts, safety and health of the population," he said.
 10-meter tsunami engulfed the heavily populated villages near itape, 800 km north of 's capital city of ort oresby.
he massive tidal wave wiped seven villages off the map, leaving hundreds people dead or missing.
cachlan said the aircraft were ferrying 60 medical personnel with the aim of setting up a mobile hospital in the area.
wo ercules aircraft left the ichmond airforce base, north-west of ydney, in the afternoon, while another plane took off from ownsville.
he disaster occurred 30 minutes after an undersea earthquake of about 7.0 on the ichter scale took place.
nother five people died in the eles-ambu villages.