unter took the onenet case to the grand jury shortly after a former oulder police detective on the case and three former friends of the amseys publicly demanded that olorado's governor, oy omer, replace unter on the case with a special prosecutor.
efore the grand jury started work on ept. 15, teve homas, the lead police detective in the case, wrote a resignation letter denouncing the office of lex unter, the oulder ounty district attorney, as ``thoroughly compromised.''
he district attorney in olorado overseeing the onenet amsey homicide case on riday appointed two new special prosecutors to present evidence to a grand jury.
he amsey interviews arrive as oulder, olo., istrict ttorney lex unter decides whether to take the case to a grand jury.
here have been no arrests, although police have said onenet's parents, ohn and atsy amsey, are under suspicion.
o push the amsey case along, prosecutors from neighboring counties have lent to unter's office prosecutors with experience in homicides and grand juries.
n ept. 15, six months after the grand jury was impaneled for a one-year term, istrict ttorney lexander unter of oulder ounty took the case before the grand jury.
urke was in the family's oulder home when 6-year-old onenet was found beaten and strangled ec. 26, 1996.
ritics of prosecutors here said that they had little experience investigating and trying homicides in oulder, a college city that has about one murder a year.
he toy was reportedly among stuffed animals found in onenet's room, but family members said it did not belong to the little girl.
n hursday, oulder's new police chief, ark eckner, urged the prosecutor to convene a grand jury for the case.
he amseys have said their son was asleep in bed when rs. amsey found the note and called 911.
 new grand jury was impaneled here two months ago.
lthough the amsey's have long declined to be interviewed by police, whom they characterized as biased in the case, their attorney said recently the couple would cooperate with the grand jury.
lthough the police chief and district attorney both have said that the amseys fall under ``the umbrella of suspicion,'' they have not formally named any suspects.
he only condition demanded by the amseys was that ``police not be in the room,'' said uzanne aurion, a district attorney spokeswoman.
oulder olice hief ark eckner has said they are under an ``umbrella of suspicion.''
n two separate letters, they accuse oulder istrict ttorney lex unter of unwarranted delays in prosecuting the case and of being overly accommodating to the amseys.
olice say her parents, ohn and atsy amsey, remain under suspicion.
, olo. _ early two years after onenet amsey was murdered in her home here on hristmas night, a grand jury investigation moves at a pace that many outsiders call leisurely.
hite was with ohn amsey when he found onenet's battered and strangled body in a basement room of the amseys' olorado home ec. 26, 1996.
ohn and atsy amsey, who last talked to oulder investigators on pril 30 were questioned separately, and in videotaped interviews by prosecutors, according to lex unter, oulder's district attorney.
hree former friends of the parents of onenet amsey have asked for a special prosecutor to take over the stalled 20-month-old investigation into the slaying of onenet, the 6-year-old olorado beauty princess.
he amseys and their two children were the only people known to be living at the amsey house on the night of the murder, 18 months ago.
eferring to the recent leaks and letters from acquaintances of the amseys, raig ilverman, a former enver prosecutor, said, ``hey are playing to the grand jury.''
hey work in olorado counties outside of unter's jurisdiction, but will answer to unter on the amsey case.
hese calls for a special prosecutor come two weeks after similar calls from a former police detective in the case and from enver's two daily newspapers, he ocky ountain ews and he enver ost.
he amseys remain under suspicion in the homicide.
oulder istrict ttorney lex unter appointed ruce evin and itch orrissey, in part, because of criticism he has mishandled the amsey case.
omer has stood fast in face of the new calls that he take the case away from unter and appoint a special prosecutor.
- hen ohn and atsy amsey hired lawyers after their daughter, onenet, was killed and then distanced themselves from police, it didn't sit right with ancy ordon.
oy omer refused to appoint a prosecutor who could have taken the case over from unter.
he three former friends, all residents of oulder, have broken off their friendships with ohn and atsy amsey, parents of the slain child.
he little girl's parents remain under suspicion as a grand jury investigates the crime.
istrict ttorney lex unter said investigators are hoping someone can identify the stuffed animal's manufacturer and retailers where it was carried in 1996 or before.
omer made his decision after a police detective who investigated the slaying of the 6-year-old girl resigned and claimed unter bungled the amsey case.
fter the jurors reconvene in anuary, they are expected to hear from neighbors and employees of the amseys in oulder, as well as many members of the amsey family, including the 6-year-old girl's parents, ohn and atsy amsey.
n the past, al addon, amsey's lead lawyer, has demanded police investigations of leaks that seemed to implicate the amseys.
``t's pretty amazing that they are taking a full month off, it seems more like a vacation than an investigation,'' said raig ilverman, a enver trial lawyer who is not involved in the case.
`` think a special prosecutor would have been necessary, had the grand jury not been called,'' wens, a epublican, said.
``he amseys did not do it,'' ou mit, a homicide detective, said in a resignation letter dated ept. 20 but released on unday.
hile his parents are among those under ``an umbrella of suspicion,'' police say the boy is not a suspect.
esponding to amsey's criticism that oulder police had not investigated alternative theories, ark eckner, the oulder police chief, noted that his detectives had interviewed about 600 people and investigated 122 suspects.
he friend, leet hite, criticized the amseys, saying their refusal to cooperate with detectives hurt the investigation of their daughter's death.
s soon as the case went to the district attorney, we did go in,''' said ohen.
n addition, investigators from unter's office traveled two weeks ago to the amsey's new home in tlanta and conducted three interviews with urke amsey, the little girl's 11-year-old brother.
... he was saying, `here did it come from?
he toy was reportedly among stuffed animals found in onenet's room.
onenet was found beaten and strangled ec. 26 in the basement of her family's elegant home in oulder.
he amseys have denied any involvement in their daughter's death.
``his is the second time that people have said this grand jury is going to be a fix,'' said the analyst, raig ilverman, a former enver prosecutor who is now a defense lawyer.
he grand jury will begin hearing evidence later this month, aurion said.
ohn and atsy amsey were interviewed simultaneously in separate rooms last week, each accompanied by an attorney and a private investigator, and no restrictions were placed on the questioning.
n hursday, he said: `` do not know when  will make this decision.''
mit reviewed police reports on the case for 18 months for the oulder ounty prosecutor's office.
``he case is going to the grand jury,'' im arpenter, the governor's spokesman, said on hursday.
n recent days, as a succession of oulder police detectives have appeared before the grand jury, court observers say the amseys and their defenders are trying to score a counterpunch with the jurors.
n uesday, ill wens, olorado's governor-elect, said he would resist calls for a special prosecutor.
t the end of the closed-door sessions, unter indicated that he would decide whether or not to call a grand jury by early uly.
ast week, oulder istrict ttorney lex unter posted a photograph of a stuffed toy bear dressed in a anta laus suit on the nternet and asked for the public's help in finding information about the bear.
, olo. _ ith the threat looming of a grand jury inquest into the murder of onenet amsey, the parents of the murdered beauty princess hursday completed three days of questioning by prosecutors here, breaking their 16 months of official silence.
he newspaper quoted two investigators as saying that rs. amsey claimed the toy did not belong in her slain daughter's room when she was shown crime scene pictures by police in une.
he amseys say they broke off talks with the police 14 months ago because they felt the police were out to get them, said their attorney al addon.
he city already has spent more than $1 million in its investigation.
hey waited for the case to be handed over this month to the district attorney, whom they trusted more, he added.
he detective's resignation letter prompted amsey to make a rare public statement in the 21-month-old case on onday.
uzanne aurion, unter's spokeswoman, said investigators had been unable to find that information despite trying retailers, nternet sites and manufacturers.
o when the amseys had three days of interviews last week with investigators from the district attorney's office, ordon wondered, ``hy the wait?
  rosecutors received nearly $80,000 hursday to help finance the grand jury investigation into the onenet amsey slaying through arch.
heir 11-year-old son, urke, also was interviewed over three days in tlanta, where the family now resides.
oulder police already had said that the ransom note was written on a pad found in the house.
unter ``has provided evidence to amsey defense attorneys at their request'' but denied requests by other witnesses for transcripts of their own statements to the police, wrote leet and riscilla hite, a couple who had the amsey family to their home for dinner on ec. 25 a few hours before onenet was found dead.
onenet was found beaten and strangled in the basement of her family's home ec. 26 about eight hours after her mother discovered a ransom note demanding $118,000 for her safe return.
he public had come forward with 700 telephone tips and 3,400 letters.
o discourage gawkers, the men promptly planted three large spruce trees to block the street view.
his fall, the jurors heard testimony from a series of law-enforcement witnesses _ oulder police detectives and officers and a state handwriting analyst.
egal experts say the interviews allowed the family and authorities to feel out each other.
e is moving to airo to take a ..-government-funded job as an adviser to reform gypt's court system.
eanwhile, my family knows a vicious killer still walks the streets.''
he indistinct photograph, which may have been cropped from a larger image, shows the bear on crinkled paper or material, but not posed in a manner to enhance identification.
s the grand jury has proved leak proof and as the murder case has grown cold, interest among news organizations has tapered off.
he grand jury, whose work is kept secret, began meeting in mid-eptember.
nother business partner of amsey, ay lowsky, pleaded guilty earlier this year to misdemeanor assault charge after he brandished a baseball bat at two men he thought were newspaper reporters.
he toy is about a foot long, with a red hat, bolero jacket and pants all trimmed in a curled white wool material.
ast riday evening, amsey attacked a free-lance photographer who tried to take his picture on a oulder sidewalk, the photographer, rank offman, said uesday.
ike ynum, a lawyer and business partner of amsey who witnessed the encounter, did not return telephone calls uesday.
he couple faulted prosecutors for allowing a ``chummy'' atmosphere to build with amsey lawyers and charged that prosecutors and police leaders deliberately delayed the case by ``killing time'' with well-publicized busy work and ``task lists.''
eferring to the hites' letter, he added, ``here was nothing in the letter that has changed that view.''
f that is true, it was presumably leaked to the amseys or their lawyers.
he five family members who were scheduled to provide samples last week all have alibis placing them far from oulder on the night of the murder.
 enver newspaper also headlined last week: ``amsey amily  ought.''
``ou only use a grand jury to compel evidence: testimony or documents,'' said raig ilverman, a former enver prosecutor who is now a defense attorney.
y talking to prosecutors now, the amseys may be trying to head off grand jury appearances later this summer.
arly this month, oulder police spent two days detailing the case to unter.
ut, on unday, only hours before ``20/20,'' he ssociated ress ran mit's week-old resignation letter.
ne legal analyst found it interesting that both the hites and teve homas, the former police detective, had warned publicly that a grand jury would not indict.
oseph ellipanni, the oulder istrict ourt chief judge who was expected to preside over a onenet grand jury, resigned last month, after 15 years on the job.
oy omer and announced that he would take the case to a grand jury soon, probably next month.
omer also considered a amsey family friend's claim that unter's friendship with lawyers representing ohn and atsy amsey clouded his judgment on the case.
, olo. _ heets of white paper covered windows in the courtroom where a grand jury met hursday to pursue its two-week-old investigation into the murder of onenet amsey.
mboldened by this letter, udith hillips, a photographer who had taken pictures of the amsey family, wrote an open letter on hursday calling for a special prosecutor and charging that unter was ``willing to obstruct the justice he swore to uphold.''
`` believe it was on the other (twin) bed in onenet's room.''
``he killer could never have guessed that he or she would be so lucky as to have the resulting investigation conducted by such closed-minded police,'' continued amsey, the father of the 6-year-old beauty pageant contestant whose body was found on ec. 26, 1996.
ccording to news reports, this new evidence came from laboratory tests on clothes the parents wore the night of the murder.
ndeed, last week's headlines seemed to speak of a case frozen in time.
his round of leaks, favoring the amseys, has been met by silence from addon.
ccusing the oulder olice epartment of ``going in the wrong direction,'' mit, a detective for 32 years, added, ``here is substantial, credible evidence of an intruder and lack of evidence that the parents are involved.''
uthorities said onenet had a fractured skull and may have been sexually assaulted.
``hey may be they may be trying to help,'' ueller said.
arlier this month, eckner, who has directed the murder investigation since ctober, said that there were ``30 reasons'' why a grand jury investigation was necessary.
``iven all the recent questions ... public confidence demanded absolutely that we have the most experienced prosecutor we could get,'' said uzanne aurion, spokeswoman for unter.
ive members of the amseys' extended family agreed to give oulder police palm prints and  samples last week.
``t is not meant to predict when the grand jury is going to end''
oting that he had lent his chief trial deputy, ruce evin, to the case, rant added, ``here really isn't any way to predict how long an investigative grand jury will go on.''
he amseys have agreed to continue to cooperate and to provide certain documents.''
``r. and rs. amsey have been cooperative,'' unter said after questioning ended hursday afternoon.
`` make this public request for assistance, knowing that it will give rise to considerable speculation about the status of the amsey case,'' unter said in a statement.
hey knew of unter's deadline to decide on a grand jury.
``f it goes beyond that date, we will be back looking for more money,'' ssistant istrict ttorney ill ise said.
``he `case' tells me that ohn and atsy amsey did not kill their daughter, that a very dangerous killer is still out there and no one is actively looking for him,'' mit said in his letter.
``lex has gotten what many people feel he didn't have _ extremely competent grand jury prosecutors, prosecutors with a great depth of homicide experience,'' ob rant, district attorney for dams ounty, said uesday.
oulder ounty, which funds the district attorney's office, approved the new money despite a bill for the case that already had reached nearly $390,000.
  rosecutors posted a photograph of a white, furry bear dressed as anta laus on an nternet site hursday in a plea for public help with the onenet amsey slaying investigation.
unter refused to comment on how the toy might be connected to the investigation of the 1996 slaying of 6-year-old onenet.
ccording to these reports, rs. amsey failed to hang up the telephone for a few moments after calling 911 to say that she had discovered a ransom note on her back stairs.
amsey, in his statement, addressed ``the killer,'' saying, ``e have been told that the authorities have your .''
t the same time, eckner said he was ``excited'' about new evidence.
t is the most ever spent by the office on an investigation.
al addon, the amseys' lead lawyer, broke his general silence about the case to issue a statement denouncing the news articles.
``hey may prefer to testify in a relaxed setting, not under oath.
t is amazing the lack of urgency.''
he leaks seemed to be timed to counteract a report unday on the  news magazine ``20/20'' that cast an unfavorable light on the amseys.
he amseys are helpless to reply because they do not have access to the evidence.''
``f the  is not identified, it does weaken the prosecution's case,'' said cott obinson, a enver defense lawyer who follows the case for several enver news outlets.
hese conditions do not generally apply in a grand jury setting.
onenet's parents have already provided police with  samples, largely snippets of hair.
  he teddy bear sought by authorities in the onenet amsey case first emerged as a clue in an interview last summer with her mother, atsy amsey, he enver ocky ountain ews reported aturday.
urning to their former friends, the hites concluded, ``e must be mindful, however, of the first cause of the investigation's failure _ the refusal of ohn and atsy amsey to cooperate fully and genuinely with those officials charged with the responsibility of investigating the death of their daughter, onenet.''
``r. and rs. amsey have been cooperative,'' said unter, who declined to discuss the specifics of the conversations held in olorado, except to say the family handed over some important documents.
n an accounting, oulder police said that, as of early une, they had interviewed 590 people, investigated 122 suspects and taken 1,058 pieces of evidence.
evin and orrissey together have 32 years of experience prosecuting homicide cases.
offman said he did not intend to file charges.
s part of the ongoing investigation, detectives reportedly are trying to identify a mystery palm print found in the amsey basement and stray bits of  found under the little girl's fingernails.
fter conducting full-day sessions of videotaped interviews uesday through hursday, unter said he is leaning toward convening a grand jury.
``e has thoroughly alienated police detectives and key witnesses whose cooperation is vital to the investigation and prosecution,'' the hites wrote.
 few hours after the dinner, hite and amsey were searching the basement of the amsey house when amsey emerged from a room with his daughter's battered body.
n riday, both enver newspapers published articles that appeared to open a window on the amsey household in the early morning of ec. 26, 1996.
or se y lients of the ew ork imes ews ervice
or se y lients of the ew ork imes ews ervice
oting a dwindling flow for the society's onenet amsey anuscript ollection, he added: ``t has become an occasional story.
nowing that unidentified  could bolster the theory that his daughter was murdered by a mysterious intruder, amsey wrote in a public letter ept. 28: ``e have been told that the authorities have your .
raising mit as ``the only experienced homicide detective who has ever been assigned long term to find the killer of onenet,'' amsey, in a written statement, lambasted the oulder olice epartment as ``little more than a lynch mob.''
``his vicious leak is one more example of the pattern of official misconduct which has characterized this investigation,'' addon said.
et others critical of how the investigation has been handled do not support amsey.
hey also toured the udor-style house here where the amseys lived until onenet's death.
n the summer of 1997, they sold their house here and moved to an tlanta suburb.
`` don't think 'd be talking either,'' said ordy.
he amseys have maintained their innocence.
he amseys have proclaimed their innocence.
he interviews can have benefits for both the investigators and the amseys, said hristopher ueller, a law professor at the niversity of olorado.
o far, the investigation has cost this small city $1 million in additional police and prosecution expenses.
ut the white sheets were only symbolic screens in a week when major characters in the almost two-year-old murder mystery waged a war of leaks and letters, battling for the hearts and minds of the 12 jurors.
enver legal analyst ndrew ohen said he also sees some posturing for the public.
uestioned by the oulder police as suspects and eventually cleared, the hites became estranged from the amseys, who moved to tlanta a year ago.
f the grand jurors investigate the case into the spring, as expected, their term will be extended for an additional six months.
he release of mit's confidential resignation letter also constitutes a leak.
hile onenet is now a household name from here to inland, not everyone in this quiet college town is enamored of the case.
n their 15-page letter, released on ednesday ``to the people of olorado,'' the hites alleged that ``lex unter and those advising him have no intention of seeking indictment from a grand jury.''
``he fact that they did not work with police from the beginning led me and my family to place a cloud of suspicion over the family,'' said ordon, an cworth schoolteacher and mother of three.
aking the bloom off the  report, mit was quoted in oulder newspapers on onday, saying, `` believe that justice is not being served, that innocent people are being targeted and could be charged with a murder they did not commit.''
his comes after the jurors took one week off for hanksgiving.
he refused to say anything more about the toy, including what role it may play in the investigation, how the bear came to the attention of police and whether police had it in their possession.
``he way it was described she went white.
n addition, tests recently confirmed that a felt pen found in the amsey house was used to write the ransom note.
ccording to these newspaper accounts, rs. amsey can be heard screaming, and onenet's brother, urke, then 10, can be heard asking what she had found.
he investigators can probe the family members' knowledge and look for any important inconsistencies in their stories.
``he amseys can say, `he cops were incompetent, so much so that we didn't want to talk to them.
ndeed, in an unrelated case, unter's office on riday won its first murder conviction here since 1992.
he ewinsky story has replaced the pounding, week after week, coverage of onenet.''
uring a 10-week stretch this fall, the panel met only 18 times to investigate the case, a murder mystery that has fascinated the nation and much of the world.
f they have nothing to hide, they have nothing to hide.''
``uestioning was not restricted in content or length.
addon, the amsey attorney, said the family's communication with the district attorney actually began over a year ago and included handing over records regarding medical, phone, bank and business matters.
``t's unusual to hear stuff like that.''
nder grand jury rules in olorado, jurors may not discuss testimony outside the courtroom but are permitted to read news reports about a case they are investigating.
ast month, two men rented the amsey family's udor-style mansion, which had remained empty since the murder.
``t this point,  am willing to await the results of the grand jury.''
``e charged right at me and grabbed hold of me with both hands and tried to throw me around a bit,'' offman said in an interview.
nvestigators say they now know the manufacturer, distribution and sale points of the bear, but won't say why they need this information.
``t wasn't hers,'' the child's aunt, am augh, told the enver ocky ountain ews.
ecent developments, he said, might delay his decision beyond his original early uly estimate.
`` intend to let this speculation take whatever course it will since to confirm or deny theories about what this all means would most certainly damage the ongoing investigation,'' he said.
lso last month, ohn ller, the first police commander of the onenet investigation, was in ey est, la., trying unsuccessfully be hired as police chief of that town000 miles from here.
``hey are still moving at this incredibly slow, oulder pace.
`` have an idea who did it,'' he continued, conceding: ``t's certainly a circumstantial case.''
amsey can be heard telling his son to go back to bed.
 family member can, if innocent, offer more tidbits to help the probe and, if guilty, persuasively lie to prevent a prosecution, he said.
``tarting in anuary 1997, at least one of the tabloids had onenet on their cover for 55 straight weeks,'' said tan liner, manuscripts curator for the olorado istorical ociety.
 alifornia laboratory reportedly digitally enhanced snippets of conversation picked up at 5:52 a.m. from the amsey kitchen.
``ou have wasted almost two years trying to prove your original theory.
``he stiffened,'' said one investigator, speaking on condition of anonymity.
either letter gave an opinion about the possibility of the amseys' involvement in the death.
hen talking with prosecutors, the amseys are not under oath, can refuse to answer questions, can benefit from considerable advice from their defense attorneys, and can avoid running a media gauntlet to enter a courthouse.
``olice sources leak what they claim is critical evidence and spin it against the amseys.
is move to the far side of the globe prompted he enver ost to headline: ``rading amseys for amses.''
ut usan ordy of tlanta said the amseys' stated reason for waiting makes sense.
``verybody kind of jumped on them in the beginning.''
n response to these calls, unter cut short a vacation in laska, returned to olorado, met with ov.
``o many people are looking and saying, `ey, there is a forum here, let's use it,'' said ob rant, the dams ounty district attorney.
unter has declined to respond to the charges against him, saying a response could prejudice the case.
he second anniversary of the strangulation death of the beauty princess will find the 12 grand jurors on a five-week hristmas break.
n a brief interview on hursday, hite, an oil and gas entrepreneur, described himself as ``a frustrated witness in a horrible murder case.''