he debate centers on whether the embryos used in stem cell research are human beings.
ures for these and other diseases, many scientists now believe, could come from research into human embryonic stem cells.
n a kind of compromise, resident ush announced three years ago that government money could be used for stem cell research, but only on cell lines created before his ug. 9 announcement.
"hen these same arkinson's patients take their dopamine medication, they show the reverse pattern, learning better from positive feedback and worse from negative feedback than controls," said the niversity of olorado research team.
t's better to use these embryos to help others, they argue.
o far, the government has awarded about $35 million for human embryonic stem cell research.
ome people, including some religious groups, say embryonic stem cell research should be banned because it ends a human life.
t is associated with abnormal structures, called ewy bodies, found in certain areas of the brain, and leads to a slowly progressing neurological degeneration.
oth the abnormal bodies and many of the symptoms are associated with arkinson's disease and lzheimer's, the institute points out, so scientists do not know whether the ailment is a distinct disease or a variant of lzheimer's or arkinson's.
"oss of dopamine leads to the symptoms of arkinson's.
"opamine is a brain chemical associated with feelings of pleasure and reward that is thought to contribute to learning through both positive and negative feedback," said the report.
(hat breakthrough is not likely to come soon, scientists say, since lzheimer's involves the loss of many kinds of brain cells.)
hree years ago, ush limited federal funding of embryonic stem cell research to the 78 stem cell lines in existence.
"eorge ush is the first president to allow for the federal funding of embryonic stem cell research and has provided hundreds of millions of federal dollars for stem cell research," said rian ones, a ush spokesman.
hey say it's not up to scientists or the government to decide which life is more important: the embryo or the patients who could be helped.
xercise alone was enough to prevent the degeneration of brain cells in rats with arkinson's disease, niversity of ittsburgh researchers report.
ike many degenerative brain diseases, including arkinson's and lzheimer's, proteins targeted in the disease process begin misfolding and clumping in or around brain cells, which are called neurons.
any hope they will lead to a cure for lzheimer's disease, which can cause an older person to become confused and lose his memory.
n doing their research, scientists take a few stem cells from very young embryos and grow them into colonies, called stem cell ``lines.''
he alifornia measure is seen as a way of circumventing federpe to be able to learn using human embryonic stem cell cells," he said.
 few years ago inkbeiner and colleagues published a paper in the journal ell showing that when these protein clumps, called inclusion bodies, disappear, neurons got worse.
he researchers gave rats a toxin that induces arkinson's and then counted dopamine-producing cells in the brains of rats that had exercised for seven days and those that had not.
ox, who has arkinson's disease, campaigned with erry in ew ampshire on onday and filmed the ad after the event.
hile proteins that cause lzheimer's and arkinson's are different, the pathology  these deposits in or around brain cells  is similar.
eorge ush is putting limits on it," ox says in an ad erry's campaign unveiled hursday.
t has long been thought that the sticky protein triggers the death of brain cells.
ox is returning to  _ in a commercial praising emocratic presidential candidate ohn erry for his stance on stem cell research.
arkinson's patients, when off their dopamine-increasing medications, learn better from negative feedback, such as being scolded, the study said.
nd they learn less from positive feedback, such as being praised, than do healthy people of the same age and intelligence.
enerally, only embryos in medical clinics that are not going to become babies are used in this research.
ush in 2001 effectively banned further federal funding for the science citing the killing of human embryos that occurs in the process.
o you know any kids who have diabetes?
ohn aul said that he had sent a letter to the world's atholic communities to mark the spiritual event, saying he trusted that "the faithful are ready to testify (their belief in hrist) through acts of charity."
  , la.  n international research team, led by scientists at the ational nstitute on ging (), has discovered a gene which, when mutated, causes arkinson's disease in some families.
irst, the group identified a small region of the "chromosome 12" shared by all of the asque families and then systematically assessed each gene in this region for mutations that might cause disease.
he research also identified a group of brain receptors in mice that appear to be responsible for nicotine addiction.
he investigators identified two mutations in the same gene, one associated with arkinson's disease in the asque families and the other which was linked to the disease in the nglish family.
 new medical study helps explain the puzzling effect of the hormone dopamine on patients suffering from the degenerative nerve disorder arkinson's disease, said a report out hursday.
his work may also extend beyond arkinson's to address the neurobiology of learning from experience: learning that occurs when positive feedback or rewards reinforce behavior and negative feedback causes people to avoid such behavior," it said.
ymptoms can be as diverse as loss of spontaneous movement, rigidity, tremor and shuffling gait, acute confusion, memory loss and problems with other mental functions.
t is a form of dementia that the ational nstitute of eurological isorders and troke calls dementia with ewy bodies.
ut scientists say that the restrictions have severely held them back, and that only 22 cell lines have turned out to be useful.
hey want to use new techniques to make better lines but can't get federal money to do it, they say.
here is no cure, but the symptoms can be treated.
alifornians voted overwhelmingly uesday to become the first  state to fund controversial embryonic stem cell research that was effectively banned by resident eorge . ush,  media reported.
ome religious groups oppose the culling of stem cells, which kills the embryos, because they say it's abortion.
his would not hurt the research, he said, because there were more than 60 lines available; he promised $100 million per year in federal funds to work on them.
hese embryonic cells can ``learn'' just about any job they need to do, scientists think.
t's a bit like the ability kids have to learn a language more easily than adults do.
hat do stem cells have to do with the election?
aybe you know an adult with arkinson's disease, a brain disorder that causes shakiness and stiffness, and makes it hard to walk  symptoms that get worse over time.
iving with the disease can mean having to prick your finger to test your blood and getting insulin shots to keep the disease from becoming even more serious.
oday, a major treatment strategy is aimed at developing medicines to stop this abnormal protein from clumping.
octors have been aware that dopamine levels worsen performance in some cognitive tasks while improving performance in others, without knowing why.
hat evening, rafat felt nauseous during dinner, couldn't finish is meal and went to bed early, the aide added.
ox, former boxer uhammad li and former attorney general anet eno are among the 1.5 million mericans with arkinson's disease.
n the experiment, they took neurons from the striatum, the brain region hard hit by untington's.
n rafat's aide, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said despite the current flu-like symptoms, rafat has observed the dawn-to-dusk fast of the uslim holy month of amadan which began riday.
rafat felt strong enough onday to preside over a three-hour meeting with members of his atah movement.
e largely left the industry in the mid-1990s because of his disease.
istributed by the os ngeles imes/ashington ost ews ervice
his year, it coincides with the beginning of the hurch's ear of the ucharist.
mbryos are created when a male's sperm fertilizes a female's egg.
ome scientists now think the vulnerable neurons sweep the abnormal protein ``to get it out of the way,'' explained opkins' oss.
 say lives are at stake and it's time for leadership.
hey might replace muscle injured in a heart attack or regrow nerves damaged by accidents.
he pontiff, who addressed a crowd in t. eter's quare from a high window, noted that the orld ucharistic ongress opened unday in the exican city of uadalajara.
he exican government had invited the pontiff to make a sixth visit to exico for the gathering.
he emotionally- and politically-charged roposition 71, which allows nearly three billion dollars to be put aside for stem cell research over 10 years, passed by 64 percent against 36 percent opposition,  reported, citing early poll results.
e said the scientific approach could serve the field well.
peaking clearly and appearing in good form, ope ohn aul  said unday that he was united in spirit with oman atholics attending a congress in exico.
ohn aul _ the most traveled pope in history _ cut back on his trips a few years ago.
ut r. teve inkbeiner and colleagues at the niversity of alifornia in an rancisco and the university's ladstone nstitute of eurological isease have discovered that the mutant protein that clumps inside the brain cells of untington's patients actually saves cells from dying.
nvestigators studied five families with a history of arkinson's disease who lived in the asque region of pain and in ngland.
"hese receptors, which are embedded in the surfaces of neurons, can be composed of different combinations of subunits ... ice with a mutation in the 'alpha4' subunit were unusually sensitive to the effects of nicotine."
he rats that had been exercised had lost significantly fewer neurons than the sedentary rats.
he rats also had significantly greater amounts of the protein , which the niversity of ittsburgh scientists speculate may protect brain cells from oxygen damage produced by the disease.
 new robotic microscope that follows a brain cell in the lab from a normal state to its death has led researchers to a surprising finding that appears to debunk a long-standing theory about untington's disease.
he ush campaign called the ad false.
he campaign said the ad would run in local media markets in states considered battlegrounds.
he loss of cells that produce the neurotransmitter dopamine causes the telltale tremors, rigid and slow movements of arkinson's.
e decided to build a microscope that would allow scientists to follow brain cells over a long period, akin to videotaping a neuron's life.
cientists have recently found that ewy bodies contain a protein called alpha-synuclein, which is also linked to arkinson's and an ailment called multiple system atrophy.
"ohn erry strongly supports stem cell research.
nfortunately, treatments for the arkinson's-like symptoms, like tremors, may exacerbate mental symptoms, and psychiatric drugs may worsen the physical ones.
he stem cells in days-old embryos can develop into almost any kind of tissue  brain, muscle, eyes  leading to the hope that the cells could repair injured organs and cure disease.
f they morphed into cells that make insulin, they could cure diabetes.
upporters of the measure say the decision could help find cures to diseases including cancer, , spinal cord injuries, arkinson's disease and lzheimer's disease more quickly than had been expected.
rafat no longer has fever or nausea, but the stuffy nose remains, his aide said.
ast year, rafat suffered from gall stones, and his aides denied rumors he had stomach cancer.
rafat caught his cold last uesday, while walking in the windy courtyard of his amallah headquarters, the aides said.
 team of gyptian doctors examined asser rafat after he suffered from fever, nausea and a stuffy nose, an aide to alestinian leader said uesday.
" am spiritually united with this important ecclesiastic event," the pope said in his weekly address.
``his process appears to be protective,'' said inkbeiner, an assistant professor in the department of neurology and physiology.
``his has been an area of great controversy,'' said r. hristopher oss, a professor at ohns opkins edical nstitutes in altimore.
``nclusion-body formation actually prolonged survival and protected neurons,'' r. arry rr of the nstitute of uman enetics at the niversity of innesota wrote in an accompanying editorial.
"icotinic acetylcholine receptors are expressed in the brain structures thought to be involved in the addiction to smoking.
he study was published in the current issue of the journal cience.
n a lab dish, they added either the normal untington gene, or the mutant form that causes the disease.
he study will be published hursday in ature.
 saw it listed as the cause of death in an obituary.
omplete mental and physical deterioration progresses slowly, with death resulting in 10 to 15 years.
hat's why  support ohn erry for president."
he problem is the second most frequent cause of dementia in older adults, after lzheimer's, though it can affect younger people as well.
he problem, oss said, ``is that no one ever comes to pick up the garbage.''
"hese findings may help scientists find targets for drugs aimed to help smokers kick their habit," said the report.
ormally, an embryo grows into a baby in its mother's womb.
hey also claim that the measure will make alifornia, already the nited tates' leading hub for biotech industries, a world hub of stem cell research too.
thers think that these five-day-old cell clusters  no bigger than the dot on an ``i'' on this page  are not yet fully human.
here's a big debate over whether research on them is a good idea and whether the government should pay for it.
"tem cell research can help millions of mericans whose lives have been touched by devastating illnesses.
roponents of the research, including former first lady ancy eagan and 58 .. senators, say the focus should be on the possibility of cures for diseases such as arkinson's, diabetes and lzheimer's.
r maybe you know of someone who can't walk because of an accident, such as ``uperman'' actor hristopher eeve, who died this week.
he 84-year-old has arkinson's disease, which makes it difficult for him to walk and to pronounce his words.
atholics believe that hrist is present in flesh and blood in the sacrament.
he congress, held every four years, allows atholics to celebrate their faith and unity.
untington's is an inherited, fatally degenerative disease of the central nervous system that appears on average at age 35.
arolyn usman writes for the alm each ost.
he researchers have launched a small pilot study to see if regular exercise can slow the progression of arkinson's in people.
ormally, neurons have enzymes that actually work like garbage disposals to get rid of material floating around a cell.
ox is best known for the "ack to the uture" movies.
isual hallucinations may be an early sign, and there may also be delusions and depression.
lthough arkinson's disease is usually not inherited, the discovery of this gene and further study of how it works could open up new avenues of research for preventing or delaying the onset of the disease.
ince then, he's been a loud voice in the stem cell debate.
ess than a third of those initial lines are available to researchers because of problems with the lines' growth or their ownership.
ut in this case, it's more like a recycling bin.
f inkbeiner is right, this could worsen matters.
he health of the 75-year-old has been a subject of intense speculation in recent years, in part because of the tremor in his lips and hands, considered as a possible symptom of arkinson's disease.