here has been no evidence of human-to-human transmission of the virus, and no infected chickens have been found at the market, according to a source from the local health department.
n a notice issued through the acao aily ews hursday, the health department said that residents should avoid contacting birds in case they might be infected with the deadly virus of bird flu known as 51.
  ong ong's epartment of ealth () on hursday reported four more suspected cases of nfluenza  51, bringing the number to 10 in addition to nine confirmed cases.
f the five other cases suspected of being infected of the 51 virus, four are under treatment in satisfactory condition and one, a 19-year-old girl, is in critical condition, the department said.
 three-year-old boy and a man died earlier this year after catching the "bird flu", or 51 strain of influenza, and a 13-year-old girl is in hospital with the disease.
  ong ong's epartment of ealth () announced ednesday three more new nfluenza  51 cases, which brings the total number of cases to nine confirmed and six suspected.
nd of the six others confirmed of being infected of the 51 virus, two have recovered and been discharged from hospital and four others are still under treatment with their condition satisfactory, according to the  update.
nd, with the death confirmed by the  ednesday of a 60-year-old woman who was suspected of contracting the 51 virus, the death toll caused by the avian flu has increased to four.
f the nine confirmed cases, a three-year-old boy, a 13-year-old girl and a 54-year-old man have died.
f the nine confirmed cases, a three-year-old boy, a 13-year-old girl and a 54-year-old man have died.
  acao experts today warned residents to be careful but not panic over the bird flu that has killed children in neighboring ong ong.
 top hinese official in charge of animal quarantines confirmed on hursday that the 51 virus has not been found among chickens shipped to ong ong and acao.
f the other nine suspected cases, one has been discharged from hospital, six are under treatment with their condition satisfactory or stable and two are in critical condition, according to the  update.
o bird flu case has been found in acao and people should stay calm, experts from the acao urses' ssociation and the ublic ealth epartment said.
he epartment of ealth prepared a fact sheet to explain to tourists the avian flu, which is caused by a virus 51 that is only found in poultry.
  he bird flu in ong ong, which has killed two people, has not become an epidemic, a local senior health official said today.
oreover, two more cases were classified as "suspected" by the epartment of ealth, increasing to nine the total number of 51 cases in human, han said.
he new suspected cases involve a 19-year-old girl who is in critical condition, a three-year-old boy and a three-year-old girl who are at present under treatment and in satisfactory condition, the  said in its daily update on the influenza ednesday afternoon.
he four new cases involve a three-year-old boy who is in satisfactory condition, a 25-year-old woman who is in critical condition, a one-year-old boy who has been discharged and a seven-year-old boy who is in a stable condition.
  he ublic ealth epartment of acao has called on residents to avoid contacting birds, and take proper protective measures if they have to.
ut it said the risk of infection is low because the 51 virus was only found in imported chicken so far.
he move came after three more people were suspected last week to have been stricken with the 5 virus, bringing the number of confirmed or suspected cases to seven.
he "bird flu" has claimed four victims here, killing two, including a 54-year-old man who died riday.
  ong ong's neighbor city of henzhen has not discovered any case of 51 virus infection at its 200 poultry farms, according to a local official in charge of animal epidemics.
eanwhile, local doctors say that there is no evidence that people may be infected with the flu by eating chickens.
elated authorities in acao said that they have increased inspections at acao chicken farms and chicken markets, but nothing abnormal has been found.
acao residents are eating less birds these days although there has been no report of bird flu cases in acao.
eung ok a, deputy-secretary-general of the acao urses' ssociation, told the acao aily ews today that there is no effective way of prevention as the cause and way of transmission of the bird flu on human beings have not been found.
he virus, known to cause "bird influenza" among chickens, apparently has been transferred to humans in ong ong.
he inter-department pecial orking roup was set up yesterday to coordinate efforts toward the prevention and control of the spread of the mysterious bird flu after three more people were suspected last week of having been infected with the 5 virus, bringing the number of confirmed or suspected cases to seven.
he death toll from the avian flu remained unchanged on hursday at four, including the death of a 60-year-old man, who was suspected of being infected with the virus, according to the  daily update on the influenza.
mong the other six confirmed cases, two have been discharged from hospital, and four others are still under treatment with three in satisfactory condition and one in critical condition.
 5-year-old child died in ay in the first known case of a human contracting the virus.
 5-year-old child died in ay in the first known case of a human contracting the virus.
  he government of the ong ong pecial dministrative egion () set up an inter-department working group today to coordinate efforts towards the prevention and control of the spread of a mysterious "bird flu" that has killed two people.
  ong ong health authorities are stepping up the hunt for the source of a deadly influenza strain previously found only in birds which has caused a global alert.
even people have been infected so far, with two dead and two in critical conditions.
nother victim, a two-year-old boy, who was hospitalized with fever in ovember, later fully recovered.
he present cluster of cases in ong ong has not reached the scale of an outbreak, the fact sheet quoted the orld ealth rganization's statement as saying.
he government also announced today that authorities in the neighboring uangdong rovince have agreed to step up the monitoring of chicken diseases at farms there.
ecause strict preventive measures have been taken for a long period, hao said, there has been no bird flu epidemic in recent years among henzhen's 168 chicken runs and 38 pigeon farms.
he stated that the  health authority has been working very closely with the orld ealth rganization and the enters for iseases ontrol in the nited tates in dealing with the investigation and study of this new strain of influenza  51 virus.
 54-year-old man died early this month, and a 2-year-old boy recovered after hospitalization in ovember.
hao said that procedures for breeding and transporting poultry are always under intensive monitoring to avoid an epidemic.
n addition, it reminded people to avoid staying with birds for a long time in a closed space where ventilation is poor.
 spokesman for the am ue (roup) o. ., which imports birds from hina's inland areas for acao, said that the company's daily chicken shipment to acao has dropped about 30 percent.
he group will coordinate measures necessary for the prevention and control of the "bird flu," or 51 virus, the spokesman said.
t least seven staff who had contact with the victims were experiencing flu-like symptoms, but it was not clear if they had also contracted the 51 strain, local health officials said today.
ut they did urge people to be careful in contacting birds, take care of proper personal and environmental hygiene and cook their food thoroughly.
hey should tell doctors of their contacts with birds.
ut it said that eating chicken and other poultry would not pose a risk of 51 infection.
he department said that people who have to contact birds should wear disposable gloves and protective suits, and wash their hands thoroughly after finishing their work.
he virus is believed to be transmitted through contact with chickens or their feces.
t is still unclear in which way human being catches the virus.
he virus is believed to be transmitted through contact with birds or their feces.
 54-year-old succumbed to the virus early this month, but a 2-year-old boy recovered after hospitalization in ovember.
  ong ong is trying to persuade tourists that it is safe to come to the city because the bird flu is not so serious as to trigger an outbreak.
nspections are under way to prevent a bird flu outbreak, such as random screening of chickens and checks on all poultry farms, said u, who is on a fact-finding tour in henzhen.
hree more people remained hospitalized.
he poultry imported from hina's inland areas are from a different source from those imported by ong ong, they said.
  he sales of chicken have dropped about 30 percent since bird flu killed children in ong ong this month, the a io newspaper reported today.
oreover, the 51 virus has not been found in 15,000 chicken blood samples that were taken randomly throughout uangdong rovince, hao said.
"here is no report of 51 cases among chickens so far, so eating chickens is safe," hao hangwang, director of the henzhen nstitute of eterinary pidemic revention, told henzhen citizens today.
lthough several cases were reported in ong ong, none was found in acao so far.
owever, "the transmission of the virus both from bird to human and human to human is possible," han said.
ompared with normal days, the daily sales of chicken has dropped by some 2,000.
eanwhile, local dealers of imported fowls said imported chickens, ducks and geese are safe to eat because they have passed strict examinations before they are put on the local market.
ut the shipment of ducks, which total 3,000 a day, has not been affected.
hickens have been identified as the most likely source of a new strain of the flu.
han told reporters that initial assessment made by a pecial orking roup on nfluenza  51 noted an association with poultry in some of the cases under investigation.
hree more experts from the enters for isease ontrol in tlanta in the nited tates arrived in ong ong hursday to help in the investigation, the source said.
peaking at a news conference here, irector of the ealth epartment of the ong ong pecial dministrative egion () argaret han said that the  government would take "a number of preventive measures to protect public health."
he spokesman stressed the imports from the inland areas are all strictly examined and quarantined, and are safe.
hile ong ong's imports mostly come from henzhen, acao's are mainly from huhai, hongshan and iangmen cities.
ocal chicken farmers say that sales have dropped between 30 percent to 50 percent over the past weeks.
"he present cluster of cases detected in ong ong has not reached epidemic proportions," she said.
 number of the patients' relatives were also found developing flu-like symptoms and were undergoing tests.
xperts say they are baffled by the virus, and the hospital authority has issued guidelines to the public and hospitals to treat the potentially deadly flu.
"he efficiency of transmission from human to human should not be high or there should be hundreds and thousands of such cases in the  by now, according to past experience with other types of influenza," she added.
hree more people remain hospitalized for the illness.
he orld ealth rganization has reportedly been asked to alert vaccine production centers worldwide to follow developments with a view to preparing the necessary vaccine.
he experts want local residents to buy poultry only at licensed food stalls, saying those sold by illegal mobile vendors might be unsafe.
  government spokesman said the group, which comprises representatives from various government departments, will hold its first meeting uesday.
u ahai, director of the dministration of nimal and lant uarantine under the inistry of griculture, said he was satisfied with the disease control measures adopted by poultry farms and ports in henzhen.
ll hospitals and clinics in ong ong have been ordered to test patients for the flu.
he sheet of paper provided information of nfluenza  51, cautioning tourists to keep up a good body immunity.
orld ealth rganization () officials in eneva said leading researchers would this week decide whether a vaccine should be developed, according to reports reaching here.
 statement said uangdong also plans to restrict chicken exports to ong ong.
e warned local residents not to buy birds smuggled in without quarantine.
"ood ventilation should be maintained," she said, urging the public to maintain good personal hygiene.
eople should also see doctors immediately for proper treatment if they have fever or respiratory diseases.
"t will be better if you cook your food thoroughly, and wash your hands before taking meals," the report quoted a doctor as saying.
or the public, she advised that the best way to combat influenza infection is to build up body resistance by having a proper diet with adequate exercise and rest.
nvestigators fanned out across the territory onday, checking poultry farms for traces of the disease amid the speculation that it could have been passed to humans by chickens.
here is no need for travel restriction or quarantine.