``t's like getting back to normal life,'' he said.
``ut the kids want to be here,'' she said.
  he day that olumbine igh chool students are to return to class has been delayed because so many have been attending funerals for students killed in the pril 20 massacre, an administrator said uesday.
``t's just good to be smiling and laughing,'' he said.
``e wouldn't have played,'' he said.
uesday morning 12 olumbine igh chool students and a teacher were murdered when ric arris and ylan lebold, also olumbine students, opened fire with at least four guns and dozens of bombs.
``hey need to know that people out there care.''
arris and lebold, who authorities say planned the massacre for more than a year, have been portrayed by classmates as outcasts from the popular students at olumbine.
ifteen people, including the two killers, died uesday in a shooting and bombing spree at olumbine igh chool.
`` was a little nervous about her going back and it is scary in there,'' she said, her voice choking.
ut to see the kids and the community come together was just amazing,'' said cott athbun, a senior.
``t's just something that all the barriers have been broken and people have to accept and take care of each other.
``he entire nation is a community of shock, of love and of grief,'' ice resident l ore said unday.
he nation and the world have joined in grieving for the students of olumbine, ore said.
`` always knew this school was very strong and this is a good community, and all the kids love each other.
``or a lot of them, it's a chance to start healing,'' he said.
efferson ounty school officials said olumbine's 1,800 students would return to classes hursday a few miles south at hatfield igh chool, a school originally built to accommodate olumbine's overflow.
``t's when something like this happens that we realize the community's there for us,'' she said unday.
eam members decided they wanted to play out the rest of the season.
f someone wanted to come and start shooting again it would be real easy for them.''
``e must have the courage not to look away, either in life or in death, from those who feel despised or hated,'' he said.
  tudents returned to classes hursday at hatfield igh chool, but the bloodbath at rival olumbine igh haunted the halls.
erbert said he had to leave because `` needed a smoke.
he gathering, held in a movie theater parking lot under threatening skies, commemorated 12 students and one teacher killed uesday when two gunmen burst into the efferson ounty school wielding guns and bombs.
here were cheers and grins here, eight days after teen-age gunmen walked the halls of their school and killed 12 students and a teacher before killing themselves.
``hat sense of reaching out makes us feel better.''
and comfort the people of this town.
any looked for it aturday morning on top of t.
ost of ittleton is visible from the top of t.
olumbine, a hill in lement ark that borders the high school's baseball fields.
ut thanks to an outpouring of donations and support from the community and the sports world, olumbine's baseball team has uniforms, gloves, balls and everything they need to get back on the field.
``t has a sound community base to it that's somewhat unusual for a suburban high school.''
opefully they are issues that will not be forgotten when time passes.
ome players said the donations and support will encourage them to play better.
ome cannot forgive lebold and arris, and possibly never will.
here are the communities that existed already, like olumbine students and olumbine alley residents.
alling the return to the classroom ``a very important next step in the process of healing,'' onseu said the first thing olumbine students will do when they arrive at hatfield igh chool is attend an assembly to reunite them with their teachers.
tudents were originally scheduled to go back hursday.
`` was around these kids at practice the other night and some of them are afraid to smile,'' he said.
``t's like a prison in there,'' said essica iller, 15.
``f you are a parent, your children need your attention,'' ore said.
``f you are a grandparent, they need your time.''
eople may not know each other, but when disaster hits that doesn't matter.
  he sheriff's initial estimate of as many as 25 dead in the olumbine igh massacre was off the mark apparently because the six  teams that swept the building counted some victims more than once.
olumbine is about three miles away.
``hey wanted death and destruction.
``hey wanted death and destruction.
people, but we've got to look past that, the exterior stuff, and just be together, be unified.''
``e have friends whose children go to olumbine,'' rs. oag said.
e're going to kill every one of you.''
o they came to the wood cross on top of t.
he response is most visible in metropolitan enver, radiating outward from the high school and adjacent lement ark, which has become a mourner's ourdes.
ice resident l ore brought the 70,000 heartbroken people a message unday: ``ou are not alone.''
arbara onsu, who oversees the county's high schools, said more students than expected had come to class.
uthorities believe olumbine students ric arris and ylan lebold carried out the massacre and then killed themselves.
``he young killers of olumbine igh chool do not stand for the spirit of merica,'' ore said.
rmed deputies stood guard at the only entrance and students needed their parents' permission to leave.
wo days earlier, a massacre by two students at olumbine igh, whose teams are called the ebels, left 15 people dead and dozens wounded.
he bomb squad was called because a backpack had been found unattended in a hallway.
``t seems like life should stop, but it doesn't.''
hus, people who don't know each other can mourn together.
f the 12 students slain, three were to be laid to rest today.
``e're going to treat them normal.''
ells, a 16-year-old catcher on olumbine's varsity baseball team, watched the junior varsity play rvada est igh chool on ednesday.
he memorials in lement ark testify to the depth of grief that those who didn't lose loved ones in the massacre feel.
here are a lot of people crying,'' said yler erbert a sophomore.
  olumbine igh chool junior att ells took time out from the grieving world around him to crack a smile, chew on a wad of sunflower seeds and talk a little baseball.
``ne thing is clear: his community will not be beaten.''
t times, the service took on the flavor of a somber pep rally.
he community outpouring has touched some olumbine students.
esidents say the area around olumbine in the outhern latte iver alley has been a tight-knit community for 26 years, since the high school opened on an undeveloped patch of prairie and houses sprouted up around it.
or se y lients of the ew ork imes ews ervice
or se y lients of the ew ork imes ews ervice
``merica is a good and decent place, and our goodness is a light to all the nations of the world.''
back and that yes, things like this do happen here.
he ew ork imes plans two pages of stories, photos and graphics on the aftermath of the school shooting in a enver suburb that left 15 dead.
nd ore, thundering like a preacher at a revival, underscored that bloodshed like that allegedly caused by ylan lebold and ric arris must remain an aberration.
ome of the bombs used in the assault at olumbine were planted in knapsacks.
`` hate to say it, but it's been like hristmas at times.''
ut ells said he is more interested in simply trying to have fun and move beyond the tragedy that put his life on hold.
he students are scheduled to begin classes onday at another school a few miles away in afternoon sessions until the end of the year, said arbara onseu, area administrator for the efferson ounty chool istrict.
tudents leaving the school said the intense security inside scared them.
``ehind you, scarred but still standing, is olumbine igh chool,'' ov.
``ove is stronger than death _  believe that,'' haput said.
t one point, two bomb squad trucks sped to the school after a backpack scare.
iane itchingham of the efferson ounty school system said schools were getting phony bomb threats.
e asked the crowd ``to feel the embrace of hundreds of millions.''
``he teachers are very anxious to see their students again,'' she said.
``hey were lucky, but why do you have to be lucky?''
here's always going to be differences between
olumbine to try making sense of something that never will.
he said the school was allowing students to stay home.
``hey shouldn't have died,'' arry llwanger said.
``ll we can do is come together,'' said arrie oertz, 16.
``t's something that can help us personally by coming and seeing and sharing the hurt and the pain.
``isaster brings out the best of us, not the worst.
wens closed the memorial by reciting the names of the 12 students and one teacher killed and releasing a white dove for each, as many in the crowd wept and light rain fell.
nstead, we've all come together,'' said hyllis ain, whose daughter, ickey, attends olumbine.
``f they would have known the revival they have started, they never would have done what they did,'' said hyllis ain, whose daughter, ickey, attends olumbine.
ids by the busload came from towns across the est to share grief.
``lease comfort them and be with them,
e knock on the neighbor's door and talk about it,'' says obert . utterworth, a psychologist who studies both child trauma and how people cope with public tragedy.
 _ he governor of olorado tours olumbine igh chool and says investigators are all but certain that the two gunmen had help from the police say security cameras may provide crucial evidence of a conspiracy.
his story, budgeted earlier, is now scratched:
``ne of the hidden truths of the human condition is that suffering binds us together,'' ore said.
he tragedy has forced huge issues to an overburdened spotlight: guns, youth violence, school safety, cliques and disaffected youth, community togetherness, peace.
``ne of the hidden truths of the human condition is that suffering binds us together.''
ast-food restaurants are flying flags at half-staff and posting sympathy signs.
 _  wave of copycat threats of violence prompted by the uesday massacre at olumbine igh chool in ittleton, olo., prompted school and law-enforcement officials across the country to respond quickly to any new sign of trouble, even if the threats were pranks brought on by a dose of youthful spring fever.
ow do people experiencing grief and anger and confusion and intense sadness navigate the unfamiliar paths to peace?
ut 15 of its own are gone, and the loss resonates deeply and profoundly.
enver's newscasters have donned blue olumbine ribbons.
``e get so busy in our everyday lives and we're so self-sufficient that we think we don't need the help of our community,'' said arny anneberg, a volunteer dispensing hot drinks and food from a ed ross truck near the high school since uesday.
he late-night supervisor is enry ouis arnken.
he evening supervisor is ynn oogenboom.
nd the families that have streamed into enver's suburbs in recent years have, some say, created a populace unfamiliar with its neighbors  one hungry for the coming-together that the olumbine deaths caused.
``t ittleton, merica got a glimpse of the last stop on that train to hell merica boarded decades ago when we declared that od is dead and that each of us is his or her own god who can make up the rules as we go along.''
``he massacre is a tragic reflection of the dark side of merican society,'' uchanan told reporters ednesday.
he day supervisor is ary cardell.
``onfronted with an unimaginable evil, this community has grown closer,'' wens said.
olumbine rincipal rank engelis called the gathering ``the end of a nightmare.''
ozens of students streamed out of the school hours early, unable to stand the tension any longer.
rothers onathan and tephen ohen sang a tribute they wrote.
onathan ohen, a junior, was trapped in the olumbine choir room when gunfire erupted.
eligious leaders urged trust in od.
nvestigators, amazed at the sheer firepower, are trying to determine if others were involved.
eputies suspended their investigation and media briefings for the day, concentrating on directing traffic for the shopping-center ceremony.
enior mber urgess, after eulogizing anders, urged the crowd to persevere and invoked school spirit.
he gifts include dozens of bats, stark navy blue uniforms, never-used leather gloves, even socks.
ick oss grazed by a bullet while helping teachers and students hide in a closet and overhead air ducts, limped behind ore and was supported by engelis.
ourners applauded as they passed, and ittleton firefighters walked beside oss, patting him on the back.
any wore olumbine everything in sight  even portable toilets  was festooned with blue olumbine memorial ribbons.
e was a cross-country runner who had recently returned from a two-week trip to aris with the rench she was an aspiring songwriter and author eager to get her driver's license.
he victims' families held the dual funeral because they belong to neighboring churches of the same oman atholic archdiocese.
olumbine's graduation ceremony will be held ay 22 at iddler's reen, a suburban amphitheater normally used for rock concerts  one baby step toward normalcy  and in defiance of the gunmen.
n unday evening, some 1,300 friends and family gathered at a church to remember aniel auser and elly leming, 16.
umors quickly spread, these days fueled on the nternet as well as by phone, that ``hatfield would be next,'' said s. iller, a sophomore.
raham praised the olumbine community for uniting under the pain of a tragedy that could have torn it apart.
``hey are indeed dangerous places,'' raham said.
olumbine on aturday, fingers laced together as they cried for the children.
s the day progressed, the snow became thick mud and as many as 100 visitors at a time came to the top of the hill to look at the rough wood cross that had been staked into the ground there.
``hat's the strange things,'' said aron urningham looking out across ittleton from the top of t.
oe urphy, a 16-year-old sophomore, said that anyone with a free hour was required to go to the school's commons.
hen the proceedings moved en masse to lement ark, adjacent to olumbine and  as long as the school remains cordoned off  the mourning place of choice and site of a vast makeshift memorial.
`` community formed around that high school, and the school grew as the community grew,'' said erry ifford, who opened olumbine in 1973 and was principal for its first two years.
he tragedy at olumbine has brought unity that for now is unbreakable _ it has reached around the world and drawn in the thoughts and prayers of people far removed from suburban olorado.
-, he imes is using wire services.
o many forms of community, rippling outward from olumbine igh and across the planet, have come together since last week's violence that it was difficult to tell.
 _  look at the situation of seniors and others at a now-closed olumbine igh.
n his only comment that addressed the killers, ore called for forgiveness.
ome players also had the chance to realize a dream.
n an age when so many mericans regularly lament the breakdown of community, the many communities that the olumbine massacre has produced are proving that the notion, at least in time of crisis, still thrives.
ore asked that the shootings serve as a wake-up call for parents and schools.
n ittleton (literally ``ittle own''), an affluent town of 35,000 at the foot of the ockies, the fresh bonding of its existing communities and the birth of so many new ones are serving as salves for recuperation.
``he question is who has the weapons, the good people or those who are ugly and warped,'' he said.
 think we have to learn from this and not let those kids die in vain.''
tudents were forbidden to leave their backpacks lying around.
o prepare for the resumption of classes, some of olumbine's 158 teachers met uesday morning for the first time since two student gunmen fatally shot 12 fellow students and a teacher before taking their own lives.
chool officials kept reporters out of hatfield and other efferson ounty schools.
y early ednesday, his deputies said the death toll was 15, including the two gunmen.
he school wanted to make sure there was enough to eat since students couldn't leave campus for lunch and get back in.
hat reaching out resonates nationally and globally as people sew together crisis bonds that wouldn't otherwise exist.
``ere in efferson ounty, the spring has yielded to the cold winter of the heart.''
``obody knows where to go from here.
``hey're taking care of us,'' coach obin rtiz said.
t's too easy for children to get guns, and schools must focus on discipline in teaching character, he added.
``here were so many different  teams in there, we were constantly getting different counts,'' avis said.
t's just something that struck my heart,'' said im eitzel, who with his wife, onna, drove from rand unction to attend the service.
s they gave periodic updates through the night, avis and tone emphasized the death toll was unconfirmed.
ut for now, for the next several weeks, people seem able only to get through the worst of it, to handle the realization that some people are not coming
``ou can't even go to the bathroom without permission, and then they time you,'' said olly ernside, also 15.
ne card written by a boy named ark hung on a larger memorial sign and said: ``ear olumbine,  hope you feel better.''
hey bring cards and flowers, donate food and building materials, thinking about how impossibly sad it is when people _ particularly children _ die without reason, about what they would have done if it had happened to someone they love, about the people suffering most.
  omforting each other with ceremony and song, olumbine igh chool's mourners turned a strip-mall parking lot into an arena of grief and promised each other they would reach past their pain.
fter the shootings, messages and contributions of support came in from across the nation, from towns and individuals that repeatedly reassured mourners that they were ``part of a larger community.''
olumbine on aturday morning to pray.
``hey've been so wonderful to us,'' the 14-year-old freshman said.
he suspects were not mentioned by name during the service, although haput also asked they be forgiven.
nvestigators, spending the day at the memorial service, were to resume their work this morning, conducting more interviews and eyeing the possibility of additional suspects in uesday's massacre.
he list continues onward, outward  beyond metropolitan enver, past resident linton and his prayers, as far as the president of the est frican nation of hana, who counted himself among the community of ittleton mourners and said ``something must be done to stop this thing.''
ince the massacre, the suburban school has become a sealed crime scene.
ore interviews were set for this more than 500 have already been conducted.
atie rona, a junior varsity soccer player with the ebels, said her team received new uniforms from didas and assistance from rival rapahoe igh chool.
olumbine and hatfield are sports rivals, but junior ohn anos said he welcomed the newcomers.
ingers my rant and ichael mith joined a large bagpipe band in providing music for the crowd, joining two olumbine students who wrote a song in honor of their fallen classmates.
, olo. _ ice resident l ore on unday bid farewell to olumbine igh chool's dead, issuing a ringing challenge to parents and schools before a crowd of 70,000.
eague director ick rcuri said he hopes the efforts show the teens they are not alone.
he ockies worked with the enver olice ctivities eague to help coordinate the donations and support.
hey bent to leave flowers, poems, balloons and other mementos of grief at the base of the cross, then stood to gaze at the familiar town that seemed to look different after such a loss.
erbert interjected: ``'m a little worried about putting all the kids in one place.
nd that somehow, life keeps moving.
hen they burst into the library on pril 20, one of the gunmen yelled: ``ll jocks stand up!
he killers at olumbine wore black trench coats.
mong other things, the gunmen had complained about their treatment at the hands of athletes at olumbine.
ittery staff and students walked past armed guards and cried and hugged inside.
arents drove up and asked a reporter if it was true that a student was barricaded inside a classroom.
undreds of backpacks and other personal belongings abandoned in the crisis still litter the hallways and classrooms.
he arrival of two bomb squad trucks with sirens blaring further shook those inside.
usinesses are contributing goods and raising funds.
ecrying the violence and cruelty of pop culture, ore said parents must cushion their children against hate.
olice have found a diary plotting the mayhem in precise detail, as well as bomb-making materials and weapons in one of the pair's bedroom.
e seized the opportunity to chastise public schools for being empty of ``the teachings of od.''
he and her husband, arry, trekked through the dirty snow up t.
hey said their priority was making sure the school was safe.
he discrepancy occurred because the  teams that picked their way past bombs and bodies in an effort to secure building covered overlapping areas, said sheriff's spokesman teve avis.
``an you still hear raging guns ending dreams of precious ones?''
olumbine, though, people thought more about healing and pulling together and getting through.
`` don't know,'' said ebbie llwanger, a 10-year ittleton resident.
chool athletic equipment is also trapped, probably for the rest of the school year.
``he problem began long before they walked into school.''
is wife nodded: o, they shouldn't have died.
eople hugged and wept as a parade of students, singers and public officials tried to make sense of the week's events.
here are myriad mini-communities created by the bloodshed: enver-area students, their rivalries suddenly rendered emergency personnel, united in their harrowing towns like onesboro and aducah and pringfield and dinboro, who understand olumbine's anguish but never asked to be members of this kind of community.
``nd we've got to take advantage of our time with our family and friends,'' imee ensen added quietly.
he principal came onto hatfield's public address system and urged students to wear ``more moderate clothes both in school and when you go out,'' s. ernside said.
 _ astors in onesboro, rk., scene of an earlier school shooting, reach out to those in ittleton, olo. y ustav iebuhr.
  hey streamed in from all over  hand-lettered signs and cards and bouquets by the hundreds, aimed at comforting a town torn asunder.
olks from lgin, ll., drove a giant banner of support into town.
hysically, it's the same town it was onday.
t was a message of hope that was repeated throughout the day.
he women, both mothers of two young children, bowed their heads, closed their eyes and whispered, ``h, od please bless the families who lost children,'' and they began to cry.
he first few visitors climbed over slushy snow that melted quickly as the sun finally made an appearance after three days of snow.
ig-league sports teams canceled games in ile igh tadium now sports a giant olumbine ribbon visible from nterstate 25.
, olo. _ ynda asma and erry erurlin stopped halfway down t.
ill wens acted as master of ceremonies during the 75-minute memorial service that included speeches from rchbishop harles haput, and ranklin raham, the son of evangelist illy raham.
elow the hill, in the middle of the baseball field, someone had built 13 small snowmen in an even circle.
he baseball team has received an estimated $5,000 worth of clothing and gear from eebok, izuno, enver thletic upply and other sports companies.
oday, though a few patches of open prairie remain, houses continue to sprout.
nstantaneous news delivery unites people in shock and grief, creating a virtual community of  viewers and another of nternet users that didn't exist 40 years ago.
 _  look at the orld ide eb as a home for lonely outcasts and talking to kids who find solace there.
hristian singer my rant began a tribute song to the victims with a gentle lament: ``o much pain and no reason why.''
ow, as the event recedes and coping begins, some are hoping that perhaps, this time, the unity allegedly caused by two angry boys' violent acts can last.
``n od's son, hope will come, his red stain will take our pain.''
``efferson ounty has 500,000 residents, but today our community is much larger,'' county commissioner atricia olloway said unday at a shopping-center parking lot service attended by 70,000 people  a hastily stitched-together community unto itself.
ne good wish, soaked by the morning rain, was signed, simply, ``our community.''
he olorado ockies opened their doors to olumbine players onday, allowing the team to work out in their hitting cages and tour oors ield.
o accommodate the 1,965 olumbine students, the school day is being split with hatfield students beginning early in the day and olumbine students showing up shortly before 1 p.m.
 funeral also was scheduled for ave anders, a popular teacher hailed as a hero for shepherding students to safety during the attack.
unday's outdoor ceremony was a mass catharsis at the foot of the snow-capped ockies.
wens extended his sympathy to the families of the slain and wounded, some of whom gathered in front of the crowd, while the archbishop told them that ``love is stronger than death.''
he school's marquee proclaimed ``ebels our thoughts are with you.''
 national culture, for one  the very mass media that many blame for fomenting the violence.
he gunmen died in the massacre as well, apparently from self-inflicted gunshot wounds.
heriff ohn tone said uesday afternoon that there could be as many as 25 dead.
n the crowd were people who had driven hundreds of miles to pay their respects.
undreds lined the procession route.
n easide eights, ..800 miles away, ayor . enneth ershey scheduled a candlelight vigil on an tlantic cean beach as ``a clear demonstration of the nationwide caring for the people of ittleton.''
tephen, a senior, was in the cafeteria where many students were shot or hit by shrapnel from pipe bombs.
he pair, enraged by what they considered taunts and insults from classmates, allegedly rampaged through their school with guns and bombs before turning their weapons on themselves.
ugs have become a greeting of choice  even, sometimes, between strangers.
 couple of hours after hatfield opened, ancy oag decided to pull her daughter, elissa out.
his was long before the retail sprawl unfurled from the north to connect olumbine to enver and make the area a suburb.
agpipe players played ``mazing race'' and four -16 jets flew over in a ``missing-man'' formation after 13 doves were released  one for each victim.
``ll of us must change our lives to honor these children,'' said ore, in a forceful speech filled with religious references less than a mile from the site of the worst school killing in .. history.
``ll the teachers are wearing nametags, and there is one at every door.''
ithout the equipment and clothing donations, the olumbine ebels would have been forced to end their season, ells said.
s. ernside, a sophomore, said all the efforts to counsel students and banners in the school lamenting the deaths made things worse.
  epublican presidential candidate at uchanan says stricter gun laws could not have prevented the deadly school shootings in ittleton, olo.
olumbine _ the rows of roofs, the sidewalks, the strip malls and trash cans, the basketball backstops above garage doors.