n ichuan and haanxi provinces, two other habitats of giant pandas, arrow bamboo was also found blooming.
y the end of 2004, arrow bamboo, the favorite food of giants, had blossomed on 7,420 hectares at the aishuijiang tate ature eserve in southern ansu rovince, a major habitat of pandas in hina, according to a recent survey conducted by the nature reserve administration.
he government has set up more than 50 reserves, most in the southwest province of ichuan.
he giant panda is one of the world's most endangered species, with an estimated 1,000 living in the mountainous regions of ichuan, haanxi and ansu provinces.
he giant panda is one of the world's most rare and endangered species, with an estimated some 1,000 living in the mountainous regions of ichuan in southwest hina, and northwestern haanxi and ansu provinces.
ore than 1,500 giant pandas live wild in hina, with ichuan home to 76 percent of them, according to the tate orestry dministration.
ut in ichuan and in haanxi province, which also has panda reserves, arrow bamboo has also been found blooming.
nly around 1,600 pandas are believed to live in the wild, with some 300 of the sub-species living in the inling mountains, while the other 1,300 giant pandas live elsewhere in hina, inhua said in a separate report.
ature preserve workers in northwest hina's ansu rovince have formulated a rescue plan to save giant pandas from food shortage caused by arrow bamboo flowering.
wenty-two giant pandas living in parts of aishuijiang tate ature eserve in the northwestern province of ansu will be moved to other locations with better food, the hina aily said, quoting hang erong, director of the reserve.
he aishuijiang tate ature eserve is home to more than 100 giant pandas.
he bank at southwest hina's iant anda rotection and esearch entre in the olong ature eserve in ichuan province will be completed this year, the hina aily said.
bout 100 giant pandas in northwest hina's ansu rovince are suffering from hunger because large tracts of arrow bamboo have bloomed and died.
hang said that at the end of a life of arrow bamboo, a favorite of giant pandas, the plant will flower, seed and die.
he latest national survey on giant panda, which was organized by the tate orestry dministration, showed that the population and habitat of the pandas in ichuan have both increased 30 percent during the past seven years.
ore than 100 giant pandas live there.
here are only about 1,590 of the endangered species living in the wild, all in hina, though the numbers have risen steadily in the past decade after plunging to around 1,100 in the 1980s.
orkers in the preserve will move old and weak giant pandas and lure fit pandas to a new habitats, hang said.
hina has applied to the nited ations to make giant pandas' natural habitat in southwestern ichuan province a world heritage area to help protect the endangered species, state press reported uesday.
he inling panda has been identified as a sub-species of the giant panda that mainly resides in southwestern ichuan province.
s of late last year, the flowering bamboo covered more than 7, 000 hectares of the nature preserve.
o protect the animal species, dubbed a "national gem," hina has set up 33 nature reserves with a combined area of 1.6 million hectares.
hang erong, director of the aishuijiang tate ature reserve, said that the preserve will intervene and help giant pandas find new food source.
orest coverage in southwestern ichuan rovince has increased to 27.94 percent from 24.3 percent in 2003, making the region, a major habitat of giant pandas, a greener home, according to the local government.
urrently more than 1,500 giant pandas live wild in hina, according to a survey by the tate orestry dministration.
s of late last year, the flowering bamboo covered more than 7,000 hectares (17,290 acres) of the 220,000-hectare nature reserve and the blooming area has continued to expand.
ang anyun, head of the bureau's ildlife rotection section, said that traces of giant pandas have also been left and spotted in neighboring houzhi and iuba counties over the past two years.
he discovery of panda traces in engxian ounty, northwest hina's haanxi rovince, demonstrates that the habitat of the rare creatures is expanding in this inland province, an official with the haanxi rovincial orestry ureau said.
hey ascribed the appearance of giant pandas in engxian ounty, located on the western section of inling ountain, a major habitat for giant pandas, to the local government's strenuous efforts to restore and protect natural forest resources in the region over recent years.
bout 1,590 giant pandas are still at large in the wild, mostly in the high mountains around ichuan asin, and 160 live in captivity.
he reappearance of the panda in the western parts of the inling mountains was attributed to recent efforts by the government to restore the region's natural habitat, the report said.
o help them survive, the aishuijiang reserve is planting more bamboo in hopes of helping the animals to increase their population.
ocated in the giant panda breeding lab, the bank will help researchers answer questions such as how many blood types pandas have and whether they reject blood transfusions, centre sources said.
hang said that 22 giant pandas living in the ikou and angshuihe areas, where much of the bamboo is blooming, are currently under the threat of starvation.
urrently, more than 1,500 giant pandas live in the wild in the country, according to a survey by the tate orestry dministration.
iant pandas, said to have been around during the time of dinosaurs, are cited as a "national gem" of hina.
o protect the animal, dubbed hina's "national treasure," the country has set up 33 nature reserves, covering a total area of 1.6 million hectares.
nd the blooming area has continued to expand.
hree giant pandas living in eijing oo will be sent to olong of ichuan rovince, southwest hina, ednesday and three others in ichuan will fly to eijing riday, under an exchange program aimed to maintain the biodiversity of the giant panda population.
lowering arrow bamboo is threatening a colony of endangered giant pandas in hina but experts have come up with a plan to save them, state media said onday.
urrently, they are threatened by a severe food shortage in the wake of the withering bamboo.
hina will soon finish building its first blood bank for pandas, which will assist researchers in studying the endangered animals' blood types and chances of accepting blood transfusions, state media said riday.
iant pandas are said to have been around during the time of dinosaurs and regarded as a "national gem" of hina.
"ow hina has about 1,700 giant pandas and 76 percent of them live in ichuan," said ang, adding that the provincial government has obtained a financial support of more than 24 million yuan (2.
"he forestry department will decide whether to send her back to the wild depending on her physical condition."
"he inbreeding among giant pandas in the same areas easily leads to the species' degeneration."
he 62.5-km giant panda suffers a couple of ailments, including pneumonia and respiratory problems, and had a temperature below the normal range, i said.
xperts with the haanxi rovincial ildlife anagement tation confirmed that the dung was left by an adult giant panda.
hina's endangered panda is migrating into forest areas restored by the government, the re-discovery of its dung in northern haanxi province indicates, state press reported ednesday.
hang said that the preserve will dispatch frequent patrols and rescue giant pandas in danger of starvation.
here are 11 giant pandas in eijing oo and only one was caught in the wild, with the other ten artificially bred.
olong is a famous giant panda habitat where the world-known hina onservation and esearch enter of the iant anda is located.
ast week inhua reported that some 7,420 hectares of bamboo, the panda's favourite food, bloomed and died in ecember in neighboring ansu province, 200 kilometers (120 miles) west of the inling mountains.
rrow bamboo in two areas of the reserve which they inhabit is flowering, which means the plant will seed and die at the end of its life span.
amboo blooming in the early 1980s caused the deaths of about 250 giant pandas, the report said.
he bamboo blooming in the early 1980s caused the deaths of about 250 giant pandas.
ore than 20 million hectares of forest have been brought under protection and 3.61 million hectares of forest have been planted since 1997.
n ec. 14 last year, eng hiliang, a farmer from oufangzui illage, told the engxian ounty ildlife anagement tation that he had spotted an animal that looked very much like a giant panda and had seen giant panda dung while collecting bamboo leaves on a local mountain.
iant pandas will not eat the bamboo after it blooms and it takes 10 years for a new supply to grow.
he giant pandas will not eat the bamboo after it blooms and it takes 10 years for a new supply to grow.
he three eijing giant pandas about to leave were born respectively in 1991, 1999 and 2003, and one of the three ichuan pandas was also born last year.
hang said the reserve will send frequent patrols and rescue giant pandas in danger of starvation, but did not say where they would go or how they would be moved.
he third national survey on giant pandas, which began in 2000 and ended last year, shows that pandas live in mountain areas of 20 towns of eight counties along the east-west inling ountain in haanxi rovince.
he pandas have been put under state protection in the past four decades since 1962.
catologists identified the panda droppings in the region's inling mountains where it lived 30 years ago, while locals have reported sighting animals resembling the bear, inhua news agency reported.
he inling pandas are believed to have separated from the giant panda about 50,000 years ago, hinese researchers said.
owever, a survey found that 12 percent of planted bamboo showed signs of blooming, rendering it inedible, hina aily said.
ince the 1970s, many pandas in the reserve have died because of food shortages.
he nature preserve, occupying about 220,000 hectares, has 102 giant pandas living wild.
o help pandas tide over the difficult period, many townships in ansu rovince have set up rescue teams to care for the rare animals.
he haanxi provincial government approved the establishment of the uliang ountain ature eserve in 2002.
he aishuijiang preserve and local governments have enhanced education about giant panda protection and asked locals not to harm the animals if hungry giant pandas enter villages to look for food.
 project to protect the natural forest was kicked off in the area in 1999.
his is a result of two provincial projects, the natural forest protection and cultivated land reforestation, said ang ongsheng, head of the provincial forestry department.
his has meant there is little for pandas to eat in ansu's aishuijiang nature park.
"n terms of bio-diversity protection, inling and ichuan pandas need equal protection, but it is a more urgent task to rescue and protect inling pandas due to their smaller number," ang anyun, chief of the ild nimals rotection section of the haanxi rovincial orestry ureau, told inhua.
o boost their blood, researchers currently give pandas injections of glucose and medicine, but blood transfusions are more effective in helping the animals improve their immunity and accelerate the process of recovery.
he centre will hold a general survey of the blood types of all the 81 pandas being kept there, and collect and store their blood to better prepare for the protection and rescue of pandas in the wild.
nitial studies have found that pandas have different blood types, but researchers have not conducted in-depth studies and lack sufficient knowledge about this, centre deputy chief engineer uang an said.
he giant pandas are predominantly found in the olong, iguniang and iajinshan areas of the province, near the cities of hengdu and aan.
his panda's situation was compounded by food shortage, as the fallen snow has covered up bamboo groves, the ideal dish for the giant pandas.
he central and provincial governments have invested 160 million yuan (nearly 20 million  dollars) into panda protection programs since 1992.
iant pandas also continue to face threats from humans such as poaching, mining and logging, the report said.
"he was fragile and afraid of severe cold," i esheng, an expert with the center, was quoted as saying.
ocals, meanwhile, have been told not to harm the animals if they enter villages looking for food.
ince it usually takes 15 years for the new plants to grow adequately to supply enough food for groups of pandas, food remains scarce for the pandas.
hina has 163 giant pandas in captivity.
"e have given priority to the afforestation in the habitats, especially nature reserves, for giant pandas," said ang.
f the situation worsens all the pandas in the reserve will have to be transferred elsewhere.
hat is worse, arrow bamboo on another 1,950 hectares which blossomed in 1993 has not grown tall enough for consumption.
 total of 273 wild giant pandas have been spotted in an area of 347,864 hectares, which officials say means there are 7.8 pandas on per 100 sq km, the highest density among all pandas' habitats in hina.
iant pandas used to live in engxian ounty before the 1970s but later disappeared from the area owing to the construction of the railway from aoqi in haanxi to the capital city of hengdu in southwestern ichuan province.
ang said, haanxi has so far established 13 giant pandas protection zones and nature reserves focused on pandas' habitats.
hina built its first natural preserve for giant pandas and began to ban poaching in the 1950s.
89 million  dollars) for nature reserve construction from the central government.
he shy animals continue to be under threat from dwindling supplies of their main food source and poachers, mining and logging.
he giant panda came to after over five hours' infusion and oxygen therapy at the center, though she did not stop shivering until the room was heated with two electric heaters.
he province's efforts have paid off.
"t is impossible for giant pandas fed in captivity to survive through natural selection, which will result in similar heredities, " said a zookeeper.
"e will definitely first consider the panda natural reserves when planning how to use the money," said the official.
inter is often a hard time for old or weak wildlife.
he far western anzi and ba regions of the province that border ibet are also part of their homeland.
he panda was critically ill and had fallen into a coma when she was spotted unday morning by a passing driver beside a road six km from the famous olong giant panda research and conservation center, the paper said on uesday.
 blood bank can also simplify the process of breeding pandas because data on the pandas' blood types and  information will be readily available to bring more diversity to the gene pool.
ays of heavy snowfall and an ensuing drop in temperatures forced an adult giant panda to hobble downhill for help at weekend in southwestern ichuan rovince, the eijing orning ost reported.
he rarity of the bamboo-chomping bears, along with the variety and beauty of the area's landscape and ecology, were cited as reasons for the application to the , the hanghai orning ost said.