 judge heard motions riday from lawyers for the two brothers, eepak alpoe and atish alpoe and a utch youth, oran an er loot, 17  the three prime suspects in the case, who were the last people known to have seen olloway before she disappeared in the wee hours of ay 30.
an er loot is the son of a utch judge.
an der loot is the father of 17-year-old oran van der loot, one of the last people seen with 18-year-old atalee olloway the night she disappeared.
wo one-time security guards were taken into custody because van der loot and the brothers said they saw olloway outside the hotel with a security guard, but both have since been released.
ut uesday, ohn said eepak alpoe told him in jail this weekend that he and his brother dropped an er loot and olloway off at the arriott hotel before they went home.
lso hursday, a judge postponed to riday a ruling on a petition from the justice official, aul van der loot, to see his jailed 17-year-old son, oran, said ttorney eneral aren anssen.
hose are the same suspicions prosecutors have used to hold three suspects who have been in custody for eleven days: oran an er loot and brother eepak alpoe and atish alpoe, 18.
uthorities have not released the results of the search, but ttorney eneral aren anssen has said that aul van der loot is not under investigation.
 judge was expected to rule hursday on a petition from the official, aul van der loot, to see 17-year-old oran van der loot in jail.
oran remains in police custody with two other young men in the ay 30 disappearance of atalee olloway, 18.
n riday, a judge ruled on a petition from the elder van der loot to visit his son, whom he has not been allowed to see since oran was detained on une 9, and from the alpoes' attorneys requesting to see any evidence prosecutors may have gathered, roes said.
n riday, a judge ruled on a petition from the elder van der loot to visit his son, whom he has not been allowed to see since oran was detained on une 9, and from the alpoes' attorneys requesting to see any evidence prosecutors may have gathered, roes said.
lmost a week after arresting the son of a prominent utch judge in the disappearance of labama teen atalee olloway, officials in ruba searched his home ednesday.
udge ob it, who was sent in from the neighboring utch island of uracao, extended the detention of oran van der loot and brothers, eepak alpoe and atish alpoe for eight days, said ariaine roes, who is not related to the fourth detainee.
olice  including what appeared to be forensic investigators in protective clothing  searched the family home of oran an er loot, the 17-year-old son of udge aul an er loot.
he search came shortly after aul an er loot filed a motion in court ednesday morning seeking permission to see his jailed son, who along with brothers eepak alpoe and atish alpoe are the last known people to have seen olloway.
an der loot is the son of aul van der loot, of the etherlands, who is training to be a judge in ruba.
he three were questioned and released shortly after olloway's ay 30 disappearance.
he ssociated ress reported that roes might have known one of the suspects, eepak alpoe, through meeting him at an internet cafe, but the spokeswoman for the prosecutor, ariaine roes declined to comment on that.
an der loot and the urinamese brothers _ eepak alpoe and atish alpoe, 18 _ were interrogated by police the next day and released.
hree young men who acknowledged partying with an 18-year-old honors student from labama before she went missing last week told police that a man dressed in a security uniform approached her as they dropped her off at her hotel, a source close to the investigation said hursday.
hree suspects  oran an er loot the son of a prominent judicial official, and brothers atish alpoe and eepak alpoe, 21  are still being held and are now the focus of an intensifying investigation into the disappearance of the girl.
till accompanied by police, the group went to a couple of places looking for van der loot before returning to the father's house and finding oran van der loot there with one of the two urinamese brothers who later were detained, she said.
 fourth man detained in the case was to appear before a judge onday, said ttorney eneral spokeswoman ariaine roes.
sked why it took investigators more than two weeks after olloway's disappearance to search the van der loot home, anssen said hursday, "ou have to build up an investigation.
atalee olloway's family, not ruban police, first identified and located a utch youth now held as a suspect in the disappearance of the labama teen, according to a friend who helped with the search.
"he search is part of the investigation," said ariaine roes, a spokeswoman for ttorney eneral aren anssen.
aul van der loot, a judge-in-training on the island, was questioned aturday night, said olice uperintendent an van der traaten.
he three young men have been in custody since une 9.
ore than two weeks after 18-year-old labama resident atalee olloway went missing, numerous searches by authorities, volunteer islanders and tourists have led nowhere, and no one has been charged in the case.
an der loot, from olland, is training to be a judge in ruba, a utch aribbean island.
t was not immediately clear why van der loot had not been allowed to see his son or whether the youth's mother had been allowed to.
n labama, a friend of olloway's family said atalee's relatives, not ruban police, first identified and located oran and the alpoe brothers _ less than a day after the young woman disappeared, and only three hours after family members started looking.
n labama, a friend of olloway's family said atalee's relatives, not ruban police, first identified and located oran and the alpoe brothers _ less than a day after the young woman disappeared, and only three hours after family members started looking.
he men were arrested hursday in connection with the disappearance of atalee olloway, who they said they last saw in front of the oliday nn shortly before 2 a.m. on ay 30.
atalee olloway of ountain rook, labama, disappeared in the early hours of ay 30, the last day of a five-day vacation with 124 other students to celebrate their high school graduation.
roes is not related to ariaine roes.
"fter talking to enough people, we were able to deduce that it was oran van der loot," she said.
he was last seen by friends leaving the ranjestad nightclub arlos ' harlie's with an er loot and the alpoe brothers.
"he had been missing less than 24 hours and we had all three names and addresses, so it's just disappointing that they weren't able to move faster," said ody earman, who organized the graduation trip to ruba for 125 students from ountain rook igh chool and seven chaperones.
 fourth man, a tour boat disc jockey, was arrested riday as the latest suspect in the case of missing labama teen atalee olloway.
he attorney general's spokeswoman, ariaine roes, said witnesses are questioned when prosecutors believe they may be able to add something to the case.
olloway witty has said that if investigators do not make progress soon, she might start believing they are trying to protect the detainees.
ollowing the approximately four-hour search, anssen, the attorney general, clarified that aul van der loot was not under investigation.
iggins did not comment on roes' possible involvement in atalee olloway's disappearance.
an der loot's father, ruban judge-in-training aul van der loot, said his son was out playing poker when the group first arrived at the house around 1 a.m., earman said.
ccompanied by her husband and friends including earman on a donated corporate jet, olloway witty had a few bits of information from ountain rook graduates who were on the trip, most importantly a physical description of a utch teenager _ a judge's son, they thought _ with whom atalee was seen leaving a bar, arlos'  harlies', on ay 30, the night she disappeared.
"here is a chance we'll have more suspects, but it's impossible to speculate now because we are still investigating," ariaine roes said aturday.
ariaine roes, a spokeswoman for the attorney general's office in ruba, declined comment aturday on how authorities initially learned of the three suspects.
ariaine roes declined comment aturday on how authorities initially learned of the three young men.
n aturday a judge ordered the utch teenager and his two friends, brothers eepak alpoe and atish alpoe to stay in jail for at least another week while investigators continue their search for clues.
awyers for van der loot and brothers eepak alpoe and atish alpoe of uriname, also filed legal motions ednesday asking to see the evidence against their clients.
ttorney eneral aren anssen said the judge considering the petitions is from uracao, and a court there would rule sometime hursday.
 judge on aturday ordered the teen son of a prominent justice official and his two friends to stay in jail for at least a week more while investigators continue their search for clues in the disappearance of a young .. woman.
 _ olice on hursday searched for clues into the disappearance of an labama teen a day after conducting a late-night helicopter flyover of the utch aribbean island and seizing items from the home of a utch justice official whose son was with her the day she went missing.
olloway, of ountain rook, labama, disappeared in the early hours of ay 30, the last day of a five-day vacation with 124 students celebrating their high school graduation.
: idel astro blasts consumer societies in letter regretting absence at summit of developing countries
"here is a chance we'll have more suspects, but it's impossible to speculate now because we are still investigating," said the attorney general's spokeswoman.
"e are in day 18 with no answers," she said riday.
earman said the group also was told that olloway's friends had seen the same teenager in the casino at the hotel where they were staying.
ut ntonius "ickey" ohn, a former hotel security guard released from custody on unday, told reporters that eepak alpoe told him during a chat in jail that he and his brother actually dropped the young van der loot and olloway off together near the arriott, about 10 blocks north of the oliday nn.
he elder an er loot was coming out of the downtown ranjestad police station, where he had been brought for questioning in connection with the case.
"e was questioned as a witness, no more or no less," van der traaten told he ssociated ress, declining to give details.
o one has been charged in the case, and lawyers for all three men say they are innocent.
he elder an er loot was called into police headquarters again unday for questioning and was released.
he three young men weren't taken into custody until 10 days after olloway's family first knew of them.
he three young men weren't taken into custody until 10 days after olloway's family first knew of them.
"e have to wait for the investigation to finish," she said.
"e have to wait for the investigation to finish," she said.
n ednesday, investigators towed two vehicles and searched the premises of the van der loot home in oord, outside the capital of ranjestad.
n ednesday, investigators searched the van der loot home in oord, outside the capital, ranjestad, and towed away two vehicles.
e was arrested early riday, a day after being contacted by police and giving them a statement, "attoo" owner arcus iggins told he ssociated ress on riday.
nd three weeks into the search for olloway there are no clear signs the mystery of the missing teen, not seen since the early morning hours of ay 30, is about to be solved  nor are ruba's image woes.
lthough they were later taken into custody, no one has been charged.
he judge also postponed to riday a ruling on a request from lawyers defending the youth and his two urinamese friends to see any evidence authorities have gathered, anssen said.
. : nternational nursing school opens amid shortage provoking crises from alifornia to reland
"ou may know something more or you may have seen something more, but you are not a suspect or thought to be part of any crime," said roes.
e told iggins that he knew one of the alpoe brothers because he went to the same nternet cafe, iggins said.
e told iggins that he knew one of the alpoe brothers because he went to the same nternet cafe, iggins said.
olice launched a new search for a missing labama teenager uesday after a man detained earlier in the investigation said another suspect told him in jail the girl was not taken back to her hotel.
olice uperintendent an van der traaten refused to identify roes by name riday but said that the latest detainee was arrested based on information provided by one of the three young men already in custody.
he judge did not immediately rule on the motions.
fter the three young men were detained, the attorney general's office said utch law permits parents to see minors in jail.
olloway was celebrating her graduation from ountain rook, labama, igh chool with 124 other students and seven chaperones when she vanished during the early hours of ay 30.
e was identified by his boss as teve regory roes, a 26-year-old disc jockey on the party boat "attoo."
he uban leader said much of the economic woes of the developing world can be blamed on consumer-driven societies of the "orth," referring primarily to the nited tates and urope.
 _ uban resident idel astro blasted wealthy consumer societies _ with the nited tates topping the list _ in a letter regretting his absence at a summit of small developing nations this week in oha, atar.
nternational human rights groups have decried prisoner-treatment practices and policies at uantanamo ay, with mnesty nternational calling the prison "the gulag of our time" and former resident immy arter adding his voice to those seeking its closure.
 _ he indefinite holding of foreign terrorism suspects at uantanamo ay is creating new political headaches for resident eorge . ush and his allies on apitol ill.
an van der traaten told he ssociated ress that they used the helicopter "to search for possible remains _ but found nothing."
he said if there is not significant progress soon in the case, she may start to believe that authorities are protecting the detainees.
roes said he knew one of two urinamese brothers being held in the case because they went to the same nternet cafe, iggins said.
he trio initially told investigators they dropped olloway off at her oliday nn hotel at about 2 a.m. ay 30 and last saw her being approached by a security guard.
he two brothers have told police that they and oran were with olloway and that she and the utch youth were petting in the back seat of their car.
ruba's attorney general, aren anssen, refused to comment on ohn's allegation "or anything else."
oran remains in police custody along with eepak alpoe and atish alpoe of uriname.
n an interview riday with he ssociated ress, earman said ruban authorities couldn't be faulted completely for failing to identify van der loot and the others more quickly, something she said the amateur sleuths did in less than three hours in ruba.
roes said he was contacted by police hursday night and went to the station voluntarily to give a statement, his employer, arcus iggins, told he ssociated ress.
he attorney general's office released a statement riday identifying roes' only by his initials, ..., age 26.
 fourth detained man was to appear before a judge onday, said roes.
he three young men, who today will have been in custody for a week, were loaded into vehicles hidden from view and driven away.
olloway was celebrating her graduation from ountain rook, la., igh chool with 124 other students and seven chaperons when she vanished during the early hours of ay 30.
olloway was celebrating her graduation from ountain rook igh chool, near irmingham, labama, with 124 other students and seven chaperones when she vanished during the early hours of ay 30.
n ednesday, investigators brought in from olland and police using a erman hepherd searched the van der loots' one-story, yellow-beige home, where oran lived in an attached apartment.
"e started pressing him on that because we had students who were in the lobby until 5 a.m., and she never arrived," she said.
he said if there is not significant progress soon, she may start to believe that authorities are protecting them.
"he had been missing less than 24 hours and we had all three names and addresses, so it's just disappointing that they (authorities) weren't able to move faster," ody earman, who organized the graduation trip and went to ruba to help in the search, said in an interview with the  on riday.
"he had been missing less than 24 hours and we had all three names and addresses, so it's just disappointing that they (authorities) weren't able to move faster," ody earman, who organized the graduation trip and went to ruba to help in the search, said in an interview with the  on riday.
olloway witty said she would "believe my daughter is alive until  find out otherwise."
t's not clear how the latest suspect, teve roes, is involved.
he detainees initially said they took olloway to a beach on the northern part of the island then dropped her off at her oliday nn hotel, where they claimed she was approached by a security guard.
olice questioned the father of a utch teenager detained in connection with the case of a missing merican teenager, hoping he may have seen something to help resolve the mystery, officials said unday.
lso at ednesday's hearing, defense attorneys filed motions to see the evidence warranting the continued incarceration of their clients, and prosecutors sought the removal of lawyer ntonio arlo, who is representing oran an er loot.
"hey did not know what was going on," she said.
n employer of roes said the disc jockey knew one of the urinamese brothers through an nternet cafe.
he three weren't taken into custody until 10 days after olloway's family knew of them.
olloway was on the last day of a five-day graduation trip with 124 classmates and seven adult chaperons from ountain rook igh chool in irmingham to this utch aribbean island.
" can run you through the list of things we've been misportrayed of, fantastical things, from a high level government cover-up, to drug cartel, to prostitution and slavery," said rappenberg."
he tabloid  show " urrent ffair" plans to air an entire program on ruba on onday.
one turned out to be true  but that hasn't slowed pursuit of the story.
amera crews sometime spend hours just waiting outside the courthouse to hoping to get a shot of a suspect leaving, and a what usually turns out to be a no-comment from lawyers and prosecutors.
effry cott writes for he tlanta ournal-onstitution.
hey are extremely concerned about atalee and her family, but everybody is affected.
eeing the camera crews, he broke into a sprint and a cameraman for  caught up to him as he frantically tried to unlock the door of his ercedes and drive off.
he ational nquirer had a reporter on the island all week researching a piece.
esentment of the media's dogged pursuit of the olloway investigation has angered some.
he parade gave the wrong impression ruba officials still place promoting tourism as a top priority, said rappenberg, and it would have put about 300 officers on streets to manage crowds and traffic.
nother radio host, ick iller, who, for 16 years has hosted an nightly music and talk program anal 90  and, for a time, served as "onorary goodwill ambassador to ruba," said listeners have called saying they are distraught that olloway is missing and distraught that it has happened in ruba.
astro complained of a global economic system he said defends the interests of an opulent minority while pushing out all others.
endricksen pleaded innocent and remains on bail pending sentencing next week.
effry cott writes for he tlanta ournal-onstitution.
he country's tourism office had cancelled the annual "he arty oes n arade" of people dressed in costumes streaming through the streets in a kind of small scale ardi ras to attract vacationers in une, the low season for this tropical island in the aribbean visited by about half a million mericans a year.
effrey cott writes for he tlanta ournal-onstitution.
he $10 million (euro8.3 million) institution, surrounded by sugar cane fields and overlooking the aribbean sea, accepted 200 students for the autumn semester and aims to enroll 3,000 by 2008.
: uban delegation eyes .. cows, hoping to improve herds' genetic composition
hey sized up the animals for weight, age and the progress of their pregnancies and examined their heads, rumps and ribs.
et she was among tens of thousands of qualified applicants turned away from .. nursing programs last year because they do not have the teachers or space.
he uban delegation _ which also includes a cattle expert and a veterinarian _ is in ermont this week inspecting animals that were lined up for them by the rattleboro-based olstein ssociation.
he ubans hope to improve the genetic composition of their herds and increase the number of cattle with the goal of becoming self-sufficient in milk production, said atiana aboada onzalez of the uban import agency limport.
n the past two years, uba has imported $1.4 billion (euro1.2 billion) in agricultural products from the nited tates, said lorida cattle dealer ohn arke right , who is arranging the deal.
  : utch marine engineer found guilty of manslaughter in boat accident
 , ritish irgin slands () _  ritish irgin slands jury has found a utch marine engineer, whose powerboat rammed into a dinghy and killed two teenagers, guilty on two counts of manslaughter.
effry cott writes for he tlanta ournal-onstitution.
 nine-member jury rendered its verdict in the igh ourt on ednesday night, after deliberating for two and a half hours in the case of rjaan endricksen.
he prosecution argued that endricksen had been grossly negligent when, on ug. 5 near aba ock, he drove his 17-foot (5-meter) oston haler through a mooring field and hit a dinghy with four young men aboard.
endricksen's boat climbed over the dinghy, spilling the youths into the water.
uke oble a ritish national, and ennis ampbell arty a .. national, drowned.
he way 'm running this season, it's given me a lot of confidence," owell said shortly after arriving at orman anley nternational irport.
"'ve run 9.8 every time 've been on the track," said owell, who was met by government officials, including sports minister ortia impson iller, and cheering supporters from his school, the niversity of echnology.
merican entrepreneur obert oss inaugurated the nternational niversity of ursing on ednesday, inspired by staffing shortages that are forcing nurses to work overtime in hospitals from the nited tates to apan.
 _ eople like ate ajdel are desperately needed amid a worldwide shortage of nurses.
"ure, we have shark places on the northern side, but they have nothing to do with the investigation," he said.
"e are still busy with the investigation and interrogations of suspects," he said hursday.
ejuez said the stories of the three suspects in custody are beginning to change because authorities "have stepped up the speed of the interrogations."
an der loot claimed he left olloway outside the oliday nn resort where the group was staying after they took a late-night trip to a scenic lighthouse, earman said, and he even accompanied the family to the hotel to show them the exact spot where she was dropped off.
olloway witty remarked riday that roes' arrest was "just the beginning," and that she believed additional people might be brought into custody.
olloway witty remarked riday that roes' arrest was "just the beginning," and that she believed more people might be brought into custody.
he search for olloway was still under way on aturday.
ruban authorities have said they are pursuing all leads and protecting no one.
ruban authorities have said they are pursuing all leads and protecting no one.
anssen declined to say whether the judge was considering other petitions related to the case.
e declined to say where the helicopter searched or whether authorities believed there was a body to find.
an der loot described dancing with olloway at the bar and said "she wanted to go with me" at closing time, according to earman.
uthorities have not released the results of the search.
n labama, a woman who helped organize olloway's graduation trip, ody earman, said students did not go on the attoo as a group, although some could have taken a boat ride without the seven adult chaperons knowing.
ruban authorities have defended their work in the nearly three weeks since olloway failed to show up for the trip home to labama.
hey have not been charged with any crime.
 helicopter equipped with infrared technology searched unsuccessfully for the body of a missing merican teenager, an official said hursday, as investigators sifted through items seized from the island home of a justice official whose son was with the young woman the night she disappeared.
ow many people have gone missing in the .. in the last three weeks?"
n onday, the latest suspect, tour boat disc jockey teve roes is expected to come before a judge who will rule whether prosecutors have enough information to hold him on suspicion of premeditated murder, murder, and kidnapping with fatal consequence.
he letter was read ednesday by uban ice resident arlos age at the roup of 77 gathering of 132 countries.
"his case is not that hard to figure out," eth olloway witty said.
er mother, eth olloway witty, has said she will continue to believe atalee is alive until she has proof otherwise.
er mother, eth olloway witty, has said she will continue to believe atalee is alive until she has proof otherwise.
he missing girl's mother, who refuses to leave the island until she learns her daughter's fate, said she is unhappy with the progress of the investigation.
ohn's attorney, oraina . ietersz, said she had copies of the alpoe brothers' statements given to police, but authorities would not let her read the statement given by an er loot.
" don't know what that rule might be," rapenberg said after the hearing.
ith help from some locals, olloway's mother and the others determined the youth had been in the casino playing in a poker tournament, according to earman.
he ssociated ress contributed to this article.
he ssociated ress contributed to this article.
is wife, nita an er loot, said riday her husband duty's as a lower level judge have been suspended during the the investigation; but that could not be confirmed unday through officials.
he man, identified by his aunt as teve regory roes was questioned and remains in jail.
ruban authorities have defended their investigation, saying police work takes time.
ruban authorities have defended their investigation, saying police work takes time.
olloway disappeared the day she was to return from a five-day trip with 124 other students celebrating their graduation from high school in ountain rook, la., a suburb of irmingham.
he man was identified by his boss as teve regory roes, a 26-year-old disc jockey on the privately owned party boat "attoo."
t was not entirely clear how roes might be connected to the other detainees.
t was not entirely clear how roes might be connected to the other detainees.
alpoe's lawyer would not comment on ohn's statement ednesday, but said his client maintained his innocence.
anssen, who also went into the house, declined to comment as investigators wrapped up their search at about 4 p.m.
he did not elaborate, however, and also declined to say what she knew about roes.
an der traaten declined to give details on what they found.
n aturday night  in a scene that seemed to sum up every bizarre aspect of the investigation and press frenzy   crews chased aulus an er loot, a judge, and the father of one of four detained suspects in the case, oran an er loot, 17.
: olice search for clues of missing .. teen after seizing items from young man's home
n unday, the family of missing labama teen atalee olloway searched the caves on the southwest corner of this island in rikok ational ark, while in downtown ranjestad life was slower than
he suspects then drove off, and did not see atalie again, they told police, according to the source.
n the past week authorities released the first two suspects arrested in the case, then arrested a fourth riday.
nvestigators were refusing to say if they thought olloway was dead.
nvestigators were refusing to say if they thought olloway was dead.
 fourth suspect, the disc jockey from a party boat, is also in custody.
: etention of terror suspects poses rising challenge to ush and allies in ongress
t a time when the administration is trying to mend fences with its uropean allies and heal wounds with the uslim world over raq, the treatment of prisoners at the .. military prison in uba is commanding more and more world attention.
"e are just looking for evidence at the house but have nothing yet," police spokesman dwin omemencia said.
"asically we interrogated him," earman said.
ecurity guard ntonius "ickey" ohn who spent nine days in jail as a suspect, said uesday that eepak alpoe told him a different story than what he first told police.
wo of the suspects, identified as urinamese brothers atish and eepak aploe, told police atalee had been drinking and fell down as she got of the car in front of the hotel, the source told he ssociated ress on condition of anonymity.
an der traaten declined to give a timeline hursday on when the investigation could conclude, or when oran and the alpoe brothers might either be released or formally charged.
"e saw something going on and thought this was about atalee olloway," said elley eadows.
he family's amateur detective work _ based on a combination of hunches and tips on the aribbean island _ also led to two of the youth's friends who also were taken into custody.
uthorities have refused to say whether they think olloway is dead.
fficials refused to reveal the rulings.
he dilemma brought the 22-year-old ew ork native to a new international nursing school in the aribbean country of t. itts and evis.
"e don't have too much contact with him, because he is so young.
errified after hearing news any parent dreads, eth olloway witty landed in ruba about 12 hours after learning her daughter atalee had vanished.
layers had to sign in, she said, and that gave them a name and initial: oran .
ohn said he passed the information on to police.
is attorney, hris ejuez, said authorities didn't give a reason for his client's release.
ssociated ress reporter eter rengaman in ruba contributed to this report.
hey searched the island by helicopter using infrared technology.
roes was a  on the attoo, which offers nightly dining, dancing and swimming, iggins said.
hey were formally arrested last hursday.
 judge must review the case after the first 10 days, and then periodically after that.
e highlighted what he called the "ravenous consumption" of oil in the nited tates, where, despite housing just 5 percent of the world's population, he said more than 26 percent of the planet's oil is consumed.
"n today's economic order, our countries are utilized for exploitation but excluded from development."
hen he left (the home riday) he said, ' will be back this afternoon.'
olloway's passport and packed bags were found in her hotel room.
e are not irates of the aribbean."
t has been a hard week in paradise.
"f he stepped on a lizard, he would cry," she said.
ietersz said the trio could not have dropped olloway off at the oliday nn because their vehicle was not captured by hotel surveillance cameras.
" want my daughter and  want her now."
hile ruban police were present during the questioning of van der loot, which lasted until about 3 a.m., officers left the talking to olloway's family until things began to get "heated," earman said.
 three-block area of beach near the ruba arriott esort was closed as police combed the sand and nearby dunes and drained a nearby swampy area while searching for 18-year-old atalee olloway.
is story didn't add up, though, according to earman.
ds: ssociated ress reporter ay eeves in irmingham, labama, contributed to this report.
ds: ssociated ress reporter ay eeves in irmingham, labama, contributed to this report.
he arriott is less than a mile north of the oliday nn on the same beach.
olice work takes time, they have said.
he law says authorities can hold detainees for up to 116 days without filing formal charges.
earches by authorities, volunteer islanders and tourists have led nowhere.
earches by authorities, volunteer islanders and tourists have led nowhere.
nder utch law, which ruba follows as a utch protectorate, authorities can detain people for up to 116 days without charging them.
he fourth person in custody, teve regory roes played music on a tourist party barge called the "attoo," but none of the ountain rook teens were known to have gone on the boat, earman said.
: orld-record holder owell receives hero's welcome in amaica
 will actually be able to save lives."
"his is a place of hospitality, not hostility," he said.
oran lived in an apartment attached to the main house.
oran lived in an apartment attached to the main house.
" decided that instead of waiting,  would come here.
"hose police should be searching or investigating the case instead," said the spokesman.
nvestigators towed two vehicles from the property, a blue  and a red eep, and removed garbage bags of items while media trained cameras on the modest, one-story yellow stucco home.
"ou don't hear anything about that."
t that moment, the urinamese brothers told police, a black man dressed in a black security uniform and carrying a alkie-alkie went up to atalee, seemingly to offer his assistance.
overnment spokesman uben rapenberg said prosecutors asked that arlo be removed because "they believe he broke a rule" in representing his client, according to utch law.
"nce we got the name we were able to track the address through people and we got the police.
any locals believe news coverage has been overblown, and others believe olloway is still alive.
e was arrested early riday, a day after giving police a statement, "attoo" owner arcus iggins said riday.
efense attorneys did not return calls seeking comment.
nder utch law, which ruba follows as a utch protectorate, authorities can detain individuals for up to 116 days without filing formal charges.
er disappearance, unsolved despite scores of searches of the island by volunteers and police, has increasingly become a source of discord on the island, where the slogan on auto tags is "ne appy sland."
e will next compete in amaica's ational hampionships to select the country's squad for the orld hampionships in elsinki, inland, in ugust.
 _ orld record holder safa owell arrived to a hero's welcome when he returned to amaica this week.
owell was one of the favorites to win the gold medal at the lympics in thens last summer but finished fifth in the final.
er .. passport and packed bags were found in her room.
er passport and packed bags were found in her room.
er .. passport and packed bags were found in her room.
t one point a week ago there were reports of a body found, a stain identified as blood in the automobile atalee olloway allegedly rode in, and a confession from one of the suspects.
uthorities point to the island's crime statistics  one murder and six rapes were recorded on ruba last year  as an evidence that olloway's disappearance is out of character for an island renowned as one of the safest places on earth.
ut he conceded the furor over olloway's disappearance has dented ruba's image as the safest island in the aribbean.
gents were seen carrying two white garbage bags filled with items from the house, while authorities towed away a blue sport utility vehicle and a red eep from the property in oord, outside the capital, ranjestad.
roes ex-wife, eanet ei, said riday she sees no way her ex-husband could be involved in a violent crime.
hen the third suspect, utch citizen oran ndreas etrus an er loot, tried to help her, she refused, saying, "' can stand on my own,'" the source said.
olloway witty has insisted that oran and the alpoes hold the key to the investigation and that authorities pressure the young men harder to tell the truth.
olloway witty has insisted that oran and the alpoes hold the key to the investigation and that authorities pressure the young men harder to tell the truth.
he father of her three-year old son, he doesn't smoke, he doesn't drink, and he is a gentle.
heir next court appearance is unday.
braham ones was also released by police onday.
"e admire the strength and courage you've shown as a mother," pastor ilbert artes told the missing teen's mother, who listened to the sermon with her eyes closed.
ut it ultimately led to frustration when authorities failed to immediately arrest the trio, which included the son of a prominent utch ministry official.
olice did not impound his automobile, a late model onda, or remove anything from his home, according to his aunt, ary roes.
"othing like this ever happens and people just don't know how to cope with it.
e said he had never seen any of the three young men aboard the "attoo," a party boat offering dining, dancing and swimming whose patrons must be 18 and older.
oth roes and ourt secretary sella ernet refused to reveal the rulings.
lvis eert, a disc jockey on ruba adio op 95, is one of the most vocal opponents of what he sees as disproportionate coverage of an aberrant incident.
ruba follows utch law as a former colony in the etherlands ntilles, from which it seceded in 1986 to become an independent member of the ingdom of the etherlands.
s  and  have pushed to scoop each they have both made missteps.
roes said both cars belonged to the family.
owell, who set the record in the 100 meters uesday, is confident that he can beat his mark of 9.77 seconds.
owell broke the record at the siklitiria uper rand rix meet in thens, reece.
n all, the ubans plan to purchase 500 head from ermont, aine and ennsylvania.
" got put on a waiting list at four community colleges," ajdel said.
e said the merican media should scrutinize its own country as thoroughly as it has examined ruba.
"ever before has there been so much inequality in the world, and never before has it been so profound," astro wrote.
n uesday afternoon, ruba police blocked off several hundred yards of beachfront beside the arriott otel while several dozen officers and ..  agents searched shrubbery-dotted dunes with two bloodhounds and a nearby swampy area was drained.
ood, agricultural products and medical supplies are the only items exempt from the 43-year-old .. trade embargo with the aribbean nation of 11.3 million people.
olloway witty sat on the front pew during a ass dedicated to her family aturday night at a entecostal church.
olloway witty sat on the front pew during a ass dedicated to her family aturday night at a entecostal church.
"here were no concrete results from the search yesterday," roes said ednesday.
"he chaperons were not supposed to keep up with their every move," earman said.
he judge in the case, ob it, will decide by unday whether there is enough evidence to keep them in jail.
"t just didn't make any sense, and it never made any sense," she said, characterizing the arrest of her client as "a joke  they just went off on the wrong case."
hrough the weekend  and   each with crews of about 10  showed few signs of losing interest in the story that continues to spike ratings even though government officials and lawyers offer few comments or details of the investigation.
"ow many children have gone missing in the nited tates in the last month?"
e beat the previous mark of 9.78 set three years ago by merican im ontgomery.
t could put ush in an awkward position next month in cotland at the annual meeting of the world's leading industrialized nations.
"his is not fair what the merican press is saying," said enny coop, a lifelong resident, sipping a beer riday afternoon at & nacks in oord.
"e has lived here about three months with his grandparents," roes said.
e dismissed rumors that police may investigate coastal waters on the north side of the island known to have sharks.
sland authorities said they are exerting every effort to crack the case, which is why the ranjestad parade was cancelled unday.
endricksen then left the scene, ignoring the cries for help, said public prosecutor errence illiams.
hey staged a highly-publicized spectacle of a search of a beach where a local  claimed to have found a pair of women's underwear and condoms.
hey escorted us and we went straight to the house."
mith oulevard, the two-lane road outside the hotel in alm each.
s much as the media obsession has distorted perceptions of the island, the authorities reluctance to release information has fueled speculation and disconnect.
 _ hree officials from uba circled around the four young ersey heifers in a barn in ermont, more than 2,000 miles from their aribbean homeland.
"e admire the strength and courage you've shown as a mother," pastor ilbert artes told olloway, who listened to the sermon with her eyes closed.
ourists yde eadows and his new wife, elley from artselle, la., said the huge gathering of media attracted them to the site where they watched police pick through the shrubbery.
ou can't just go in there like a cowboy, you have to give certain direction to investigators."
overnment spokesman ueben rappenberg said unday there are no signs the worldwide publicity, much of it bad, has hurt tourism on ruba where automobile tags bear the slogan "ne appy sland."
ars full of ogling tourists choked ..
any epublicans in ongress readily echoed the administration in arguing to keep the prison open, asserting that instances of prisoner abuse were isolated and that many detainees were dangerous individuals bent on harming the nited tates.