  ishuangbanna, one of hina's largest tropical rain forest reserves, will almost double its area to bring more wild plants and animals under protection.
ianfeng ountain tropical rain forest, covering more than 44,600 hectares, is now the largest in hina.
   tropical rain forest project is to start soon in south hina's ainan province.
  xperts from across hina today called for urgent action to protect the dwindling number of black gibbons in southern hina's ainan province.
  orthwest hina's unnan rovince has launched a project to strengthen environmental protection, and will pour more investment into the sector.
ow there are only 15 to 20 gibbons remaining in the mountain area.
nder the program tropical rain-forest trees will be planted, along with tropical fruit trees and economic trees.
  hina's largest tropical rain forest, in the ishuangbanna nature reserve in unnan rovince, will get further protection when the reserve is enlarged from 247,000 ha to 533,000 ha, according to huang an, head of the ishuangbanna ai utonomous refecture.
ocated in the western part of ainan province, awangling ountain boasts more than 1,000 varieties of wild animals, with over 40 kinds belonging to rare animals.
n the 1950s, there were 2,000 black gibbons living in the forest area of the province's 10 counties.
unnan also has decided to strengthen environmental protection of its lake areas, which are the main residential areas there, by working out many restrictions for the use of lake resources.
he forest is of great importance to the environmental and ecological protection in ainan province and even outheast sia.
  he 17th frica imber onference sponsored by the frican imber rganization () is to open in ngola's northern city abinda from pril 29 to ay 7.
alaysia, also endowed with rich tropical rain forest, will build bases on its territory to pick up and analyse data from the satellites.
he province has limited the number of trees to be chopped down in the forest area in northwest unnan and has stopped building sugar factories in the ishuangbanna region to preserve the only tropical rain forest in the country located there.
t first set up a tropical primary forest protection zone in the area in 1951.
he first nature reserve was established on 57,000 ha of land in ishuangbanna as early as in 1959, and after nearly four decades it has grown to 247,000 ha with most of the rain forest.
he ishuangbanna ai utonomous refecture of southwest hina's unnan rovince has decided to enlarge the reserve area to 470,000 hectares from its present 268,000 ha., according to the local government.
ibbons are regarded as an animal indicator in the tropical rain forest.
he area, bordering on yanmar and aos, earned its reputation as "a kingdom of plants and animals" for its more than 20,000 species of plants, 429 species of birds, and 67 species of animals.
ore than 30,000 people are expected to benefit from the project.
he project area now has 12,000 people, mainly of the i nationality.
elated agricultural and sideline product processing zones will also be established in the area of 5,400 hectares in ianfeng ountain area, edong county in southern parts of ainan province.
   ministerial meeting of frica's lumber producers will meet in abinda, ngola to discuss and work out new policy for lumber imports and exports.
hey have the same skeletal structure as humans  four limbs, facial features, internal organs, and similar blood as human and they are physiologically, psychologically and mentally similar to human beings.
he dwindling rain forest reserves and rapid expansion of the ahara desert southwards pose a threat to the survival of the people in the frican countries, uma warned.
he two sides have agreed to support the early implementation of the decisions taken at the sia-urope eeting () in angkok in arch this year.
he , set up in 1976, comprises ngola, anzania, iberia, he entral frican epublic, ameroon, igeria, aire, the ongo, orte 'voire, abon, ao ome and rincipe, hana, quatorial uinea.
ngola, iberia, igeria, abon, ongo, ameroon, ao ome and rincipe, anzania, hana, ote d'voire, aire, quatorial uinea and the entral frican epublic are members of the frican umber rganization.
t has already succeeded in improving the water quality of the ianchi ake and anpanjiang iver.
y the year 2000, the volume of waste discharged by unnan will be reduced to the national standard.
he cademy of ciences has observation posts in the forest to study the bio-diversity and scientists have moved 3,000 rare plants to a special 90-ha area for protection.
uma made the appeal while opening a five-day international workshop on composite materials and waste minimization here on onday.
any international and foreign organizations have paid close attention to the protection of gibbons.
hey sent teams to conduct on-the-spot studies, established research centers, provide funds and publish information to generate world wide attention to their plight.
e said that the indiscriminate use of forests is largely caused by poverty, "symbolized by such negative practices as rampant felling of trees for firewood and bad farming practices."
an ingguo, of the ishuangbanna ropical otanical arden, says that the imalayas acts as a natural protective screen, stopping cold air from the north, while warm, moist air from the ndian cean brings plentiful rain.
he vice-president noted that deforestation and land degradation are taking place at a great pace in the country, cautioning that unless drastic measures were taken, anzania and many other frican countries would soon experience desertification.
e said that there is great hope in new technologies to turn agricultural residues and wastes into useful construction materials and therefore reduce dependence on wood products.
atellites currently monitoring the region cannot see clearly through the thick clouds which cover the region for several months annually, but the s can do that.
  anzanian ice-resident mar li uma has called for concerted efforts and cooperation among frican nations in designing programs to curb deforestation and land degradation.
 joint statement issued today at the end of the four-day official visit by ustrian hancellor ranz ranitzky to alaysia said ustria has offered scholarships for alaysian students' post-graduate studies in sustainable rain forest management in the country.
  razil and alaysia are to jointly launch a series of remote sensing satellites () from 1998 to monitor tropical forests.
alaysia and ustria also agreed to work together with other participants of the  process on the establishment of an sian uropean usiness ouncil which will comprise representatives from small and medium-sized enterprises.
ainan provincial government department has vowed to set up a foundation for the protection of gibbons, and to prevent and crack down on activities which threaten the life of gibbons.
ui iaosu, an official in charge of the implementation of the project, said that the theme of the project will focus on environmental protection and help the poor in the project area.
hey called on government departments to participate in and mobilize social forces to enhance the construction and management of a natural protection zone on awangling ountain, where black gibbons live.
here are also many endangered and unique plants in the area.
pecialists will meet on pril 27 to make preparation for the meeting at a center in abinda, built specially by the government at a cost of 5 million ..
hinese government has always attached great importance to the protection of this area.
he statement said alaysian rime inister ahathir ohamad has agreed to visit ustria in the near future in a bid to promote closer cooperation between the two countries.
fficials of the preparatory committee was quoted by the ngolan ews gency today as saying the meeting, scheduled on ay 2-5, will also discuss the issue of how to protect the varieties of tropical rain forest.
onservation of tropical rain forest will be another major topic for the meeting, ngola's eputy inister of griculture acarias ambeny announced here today.
razil, which is in charge of the design of the , plans to build a land-monitoring base in the uiaba city, located in mazon's antanal wetlands.
irector of the razilian institute, arcio ogueira arbosa, recently visited alaysia to negotiate the joint launching of the s, a project which is estimated to last eight years.
 national forest garden was established there in 1992, and in 1993, ainan provincial government decided to stop commercial tree felling in the area.
unnan plans to achieve widespread improvement in its environment by the first decade of the next century, with forest coverage rate hitting 30 percent, and the area of natural reserve zones accounting for eight percent of the province's total land.
fforts will be focused on 100 severely polluting sources, and provincial officials will close 15 kinds of small enterprises.
uring the conference, representatives from 13  member states will also discuss an  work report and a 1996/98 budget of the organization.
mplementation of the project will stimulate local economic development, expand employment and improve farming skills of local people.
ibbons are of high research value, regarded by many as precious as giant pandas in hina, according to experts.
his allows the tropical rain forest to harbor many rare and valuable flora and fauna that are on the verge of extinction elsewhere, an says, but because it's between a torrid zone and a subtropical zone, it is more fragile than those at the equator.
 total of 150 experts and professors from 25 research institutes and colleges across the country have launched the nationwide appeal.
he workshop is being attended by experts from 14 countries in frica and urope.
he focus of the forthcoming timber conference is to discuss and formulate new policies on frican development of timber industry, including timber export and import.
egional ecological protection programs have also been launched to reduce the deterioration of the ecological environment.
  alaysia and ustria have agreed to further expand bilateral relations by promoting two-way trade, mutual investment, creation of joint ventures and third market initiatives.
ustria also invited alaysian experts to study the dual system of vocational education in the country, its hydroelectric power generation and ustrian know-how in the use of mineral springs for therapeutical and preventive medical purposes.
eanwhile ui is also confident about the economic returns of the project, since the area boasts rich land resources and favorable soil and climate conditions for the growing of tropical rain trees.
he launching of the s, the first of this kind of satellite on a permanent orbit 900 kilometers above the equator, is estimated to cost 37 millon .. dollars.
he s will monitor 2,200 square kilometers of the mazon rain forest, which it will pass over every 105 minutes, said razil's ational nstitute of pace esearch.
hina's largest group of wild ndian elephants, as well as gaurus, peacocks, gibbons, and 105 other endangered species under protection, inhabit the primeval forest.
ishuangbanna has at least 58 species of rare or endangered plants, 15 percent of hina's total number, and it is home to 102 species of mammals and 427 species of birds, a quarter and a third of hina's total, respectively.
huang says that they are removing itinerant farmers from the rain forest and helping them settle elsewhere.
iving space for gibbons fell dramatically with increasing human population, deterioration of forest environments, and excessive cutting of tropical rain forests.
he project will cost 35 million  dollars, with 18 million coming from sian evelopment ank loans.
rotecting the area means protecting an important gene storehouse, an says.
he government has also formed a team of armed patrolmen to discourage poaching and illegal lumbering in the area.