, reece   ypriot passenger plane with 121 people on board crashed unday just north of the reek capital, after being shadowed for 43 helpless minutes by fighter jets reporting that the co-pilot was slumped over the controls and that there was no sign of the pilot.
ost of the passengers and crew were reek ypriot, the spokesman said.
he co-pilot of the elios irways flight from arnaca, yprus, was slumped over the controls and the captain was not in the cockpit, the reek air force said after sending two -16 jets to intercept the airliner after it failed to respond to radio calls.
thens radio quoted eyewitnesses as saying that the plane was being accompanied by two reek fighter jets when it went down.
reek government spokesman heodoros oussopoulos said that when the -16 pilots flew by the elios irways plane a second time, they saw two people apparently trying to take control of the oeing 737.
overnment spokesman heodoros oussopoulos flatly rejected media speculation that two air force fighter jets, which were sent to track the aircraft after its crew failed to communicate with reece's air traffic control on its entry, had been ordered to shoot down the plane on fears of terrorism.
reek radio and television stations reported that the air force pilots in the two fighter jets did not see any movement in the cockpit of the airliner before the crash and it was unclear if the two pilots were in their seats.
fter losing contact with the thens airport's control tower, the reek air force immediately sent two -16 fighter jets to lead the airliner.
he reek government on unday ruled out the possibility of a terror attack after a ypriot oeing 737 operated by the private elios irways crashed unday north of thens, killing all 115 passengers and six crew members on board.
reek government spokesman oussopoulos said the pilots sent to investigate reported that with the pilots out of action there may have been a last-gasp effort by two others on the plane to bring the craft back under control.
irport officials in arnaka said the pilot of the airliner reported problems with the air-conditioning system minutes before losing contact with reek and ypriot traffic controllers.
efore the plane crashed, the reek fighter pilots reported seeing two people trying to take the controls in the cockpit.
he two reek jet fighters that shadowed the passenger plane spotted the co-pilot slouched over the controls.
 ypriot elios irways oeing 737 jetliner with 115 passengers and six crew members on board crashed unday north of thens, reek news media reported.
he pilots of the -16s said they saw the jet's co-pilot slumped over the controls and the pilot was not in the cockpit.
eports said that crew notified ypriot authorities of a fault in the aircraft's air conditioning unit on approaching reek airspace, but made no contact with reek air traffic controllers on entry.
he -16 pilots, flanking the elios aircraft, saw an unconscious co-pilot and no captain in the cockpit, reek government spokesman heodoros oussopoulos said in a briefing for reporters in thens.
he two who entered the cockpit to attempt to control the plane may have been crew or passengers, a government official said.
mong the passengers on the flight were 48 children, said a spokesman for elios irways quoted by thens ews gency.
mong the passengers on the flight were 48 children, a spokesman for elios irways was quoted by thens ews gency as saying.
he ypriot airliner that crashed unday in reece, killing all 121 people on board, may have experienced a catastrophic loss of cabin pressure that rapidly starved the pilots of oxygen, aviation experts said.
e said the pilot had mentioned a problem with the plane's air-conditioning system before losing contact.
eports said the crew notified ypriot authorities of a fault in the aircraft's air conditioning unit on approaching reek airspace, but made no contact with reek air traffic controllers on entry.
ost of the people on board may have been dead or unconscious for the last hour or so that the plane traveled, on automatic pilot, until crashing, a civil aviation official in thens said.
ne passenger reportedly sent a text message before the crash to say that the pilots were unconscious and "we are all frozen."
wo -16 fighter jets sent from a military base in rete located the aircraft a few minutes later in the southern egean, but calls for identification went unheeded and the plane appeared to be out of control, reports said.
wo -16 fighter jets sent from a military base in rete located the aircraft a few minutes later in the southern egean, but calls for identification went unheeded and the plane appeared to be out of control, reports said.
ne report from the scene said some of the bodies were wearing orange oxygen masks.
xygen masks were seen hanging in the cabin, a reek government spokesman said.
he pilots also saw oxygen masks down when they got close to the aircraft.
t would not be responsible to say anything yet about the cause of the descent," said reek overnment pokesman heodoros oussopoulos.
hey noticed that the oxygen masks had deployed inside the cabin and, a few minutes later, saw two people enter the cockpit to attempt to gain control of the doomed flight, oussopoulos said.
ess than an hour later, elios irways light 522 bound for thens slammed into the side of a wooded reek hill unday, killing all 121 people aboard.
wo reek fighter pilots, peering into the plane, saw "a lifeless cockpit," according to a reek air force spokesman, even though the elios ir oeing 737 continued flying, apparently on autopilot, for nearly three-quarters of an hour before it slammed into a wooded, uninhabited gorge near the town of rammatikos at 12:03 p.m.
he crew would attempt to bring the plane down to an altitude of about 10,000 feet (3,050 meters), where the air is breathable.
he attempts continued until 10:55, when the lack of communication triggered reek emergency procedures known as ''renegade alert``: the reek air force scrambled two -16 fighters to escort the plane to its landing.
xperts were also looking into what might have happened in the last minutes of the plane which was declared "renegade" when it entered reek air space and failed to make radio contact, causing two -16 air force jets planes to scramble to investigate.
reek and ypriot officials said unday that, while nothing could be ruled out, it appeared unlikely that terrorism was involved.
reek efense inistry officials said no chain of events could be ruled out in a crash that baffled many aviation experts, though by late afternoon terrorism was being discounted.
    
viation experts were baffled, saying it was rare for a plane to crash because of depressurization.
olice and firefighters at the crash site reportedly said there were no immediate signs of survivors.
olice and firefighters at the crash site reportedly said there were no immediate signs of survivors.
n thens, a senior efense inistry official said: "e're not ruling out anything.
hortly after takeoff unday morning, the elios pilot radioed to ground control in anarca that he was having trouble with the air conditioning, reek officials said.
reek fire chief hristos metis said there were no survivors among the 115 passengers and six crew on board the plane.
efense inistry officials said two -16 fighter jets were ordered to an urgent reconnaissance flight at 10:55 a.m.
 ypriot oeing 737 operated by a private jetliner elios irways crashed unday north of thens, with 115 passengers including 48 children and six crew members on board, reek news media reported.
ut other experts said a sudden loss of pressurization would not have caused an airplane to crash, nor would it have made the pilots immediately unconscious, as the pilots would have had their own oxygen supply.
edia reports quoted sources with the efense inistry and fire department as saying that the plane crashed at about 12:20 p.m. (0920 ) near the coastal town of rammatikos, about 40 kilometers north of the capital city of thens.
lying at close quarters, air force officers reported that the aircraft's co-pilot appeared to have collapsed over his controls but no captain was visible through the cockpit window.
lying at close quarters, air force officers reported that the aircraft's co-pilot appeared to have collapsed over his controls but no captain was visible through the cockpit window.
e was wearing an oxygen mask, apparently unconscious, reece's government spokesman, heodore oussopoulos, said after a marathon crisis meeting led by the reek prime minister.
" ran to help, but on arrival  found dead bodies, human parts and clothing scattered everywhere," one witness at the site of the crash said, according to television reports.
owever, reek media and ypriot resident's spokesman arios arogian said that terrorism had been ruled out in the incident on the basis of collected information.
t also was unclear whether why the elios plane eventually lost altitude and crashed; one possibility was that it ran out of fuel.
he elios irways flight 522 was headed from arnaca, yprus, to thens nternational irport.
"f it was on automatic pilot at the time, as it probably would have been, there's no reason why it would have crashed immediately due to lack of pressure."
fter the plane lost contact with air traffic controllers "for more than an hour," said oannis antazaratos, head of the air traffic control tower at leftherios enizelos nternational irport, "we had no idea who was flying the plane."
ne eyewitness described the instant the oeing 737 smashed into the mountain flanked by two -16 fighter jets sent to intercept the passenger plane after it failed to respond to radio signals.
he cause of the crash, which killed all the 121 people aboard, was unclear, but it was apparently a technical problem, official sources said.
e noted that drop-down oxygen masks provided in the passenger cabin are not powerful enough to sustain consciousness for very long.
y unday afternoon, senior reek and ypriot officials began minimizing the likelihood of terrorism.
eanwhile, ypriot officials said there is no evidence of terrorism so far.
he reek government said on unday that no evidence of terrorism or foul play had emerged after the plane crashed.
``f the crew had any indication at all of any problem (with air systems) they would immediately be on very robust emergency systems.
"he first indications, in yprus and in reece, are that it was not caused by a terrorist act," said arios aroyian, a spokesman for ypriot resident assos apadopoulos in icosia.
he flight was headed from the ypriot city of arnaca to thens nternational irport.
reek efense inistry and fire department said that the plane crashed to a mountain at about 12:20 p.m. (0920 ) near the coastal town of rammatikos, about 40 kilometers north of thens, just a few minutes before its scheduled landing time on a flight from arnaca nternational irport of yprus to rague via thens.
y 11:20 a.m., said the reek air force spokesman, iannis apageorgiou, "the fighter pilots had visual contact of the aircraft."
houting "murderers," and "ou deserve lynching," the crowd demanded to know whether their relatives were actually on board the elios irways flight 522 that left arnaca for thens nternational irport when it crashed at about 12:20 p.m. (0920) near rammatiko, about 40 kilometers (25 miles) north of the reek capital.
ut that the plane was not shot down by armed -16 jet fighters suggests that this may not have been a terrorist attack."
ne pilot reportedly had complained of trouble with the plane's air-conditioning system early in the flight.
"here were some body parts but most were just as their mother made them."
"he fire is still burning and there are no survivors."
fficials were also citing decompression in the cabin and cockpit as a possible cause, and said the plane's two black boxes had been located.
ompany officials denied reports news reports out of yprus that the plane had been withdrawn last year for technical problems.
f this is what happened, it still does not explain how or why these systems failed, and whether the pilots were alerted by alarms that are standard equipment on jetliners.
 senior official at the ublic rder inistry speculated that a sudden drop in cabin pressure could have caused the disaster.
"he first indications," said arios aroyian, a spokesman for the yprus president, assos apadopoulos, "are that it was not caused by a terrorist act."
he plane crashed to a mountain at about 12:20 p.m. (0920 ) near the coastal town of rammatikos, about 40 km north of thens, just a few minutes before its scheduled landing time on a flight from arnaca nternational irport of yprus to rague via thens.
hat seems rather improbable because a passenger sent a text message" to a relative after the pilots apparently lost consciousness, he said.
rom then on, apageorgiou said, "he two fighter jets escorted the passenger plane, watching it crash into the mountain at 12:03."
xperts were puzzled by reports that passengers may have remained conscious longer than the pilots.
igh in the skies above the egean ea, two reek fighter pilots nudged their -16s to either side of a ypriot passenger jet and quickly discerned the disaster that was unfolding.
ighter planes observed the cockpit windows iced over, a sign of depressurization.
nstead, the leading theory about what went wrong on the oeing 737 was a catastrophic loss of cabin pressure that would have starved the pilots and passengers of oxygen.
otiris outas, a cousin of one of the passengers on the plane, told reece's lpha television that he received a text message from the cousin on his mobile phone minutes before the crash.
nother source of incapacitation can be smoke or fumes in the cockpit.
" took my car and went straight to the mountain ...
"here is wreckage everywhere," rammatiko ayor eorge apageorgiou said.
t flies to ublin, reland; ofia, ulgaria; arsaw, oland; rague; trasbourg, rance; and several ritish airports.
s dusk fell, rescue vehicles began ferrying the remains, wrapped in green body bags, out of the valley and to a fleet of 17 ambulances, which were relaying the bodies to a morgue in the thens suburb of histo.
``ou're not going to miss this anyway because you're ears are going to start popping,'' he said.
he tail, emblazoned with an ancient reek symbol of the sun, ended up on a dirt road.
imes staff writer lizabeth ouglass in os ngeles contributed to this report.
atthew . ald contributed reporting from ashington.
ense black smoke billowed from several small fires.
lanes of that vintage commonly carry autopilots capable of climbing to a pre-assigned altitude, and even following a predetermined course from point to point, without pilot intervention, once the course has been entered.
"f the aircraft is at 30,000 feet (9,150 meters), you don't stay conscious for long, maybe 15 to 30 seconds.
"f the aircraft went into depressurization very quickly you only have a few seconds before you lose consciousness because you don't have any air to breathe at that altitude," ates said.
he -16s intercepted the elios flight at 34,000 feet, officials said.
eams of rescue workers, firefighters and ambulances, meanwhile, scrambled to the wooded crash site as authorities evacuated a nearby monastery threatened by a brush fire started by the crash.
 spokesman for the reek air force said the -16s intercepted the plane at an altitude of 10,360 meters (34,000 feet).
verhead oxygen masks in the cabin section had dropped into place.
verhead oxygen masks in the cabin section had dropped into place.
oussopoulos said the black box of the plane had been found and investigation of the cause had been under way.
 saw about 80 dead bodies, some were children," he said.
hough the plane was out of radio contact with the ground for more than an hour after that, it appeared that at least some passengers remained conscious.
here were no survivors in what officials called reece's worst airline accident.
he plane crossed into reek airspace about half an hour later, around 9:30 a.m. thens air traffic controllers began attempting to contact the plane at 10:07 a.m. to initiate landing procedures, but received no response.
he dead included 48 reek ypriot children and youths on a holiday school trip to rague, a spokesman for elios said.
ne of the pilots appeared to have fallen ill or unconscious, according to reports.
reek state television quoted yprus ransport inister aris hrasou as saying the plane had problems with decompression in the past.
light 522 left the arnaka airport at 9 a.m. carrying 115 passengers and six crew members.
he crash, the worst air disaster in reece and the worst involving a ypriot airline, perplexed aviation experts astounded by what appeared to have been a catastrophic failure of cabin pressure or oxygen supply at 10 km up.
arewell cousin  we're frozen," one passenger wrote in a text message from a cell phone, according to an interview with a relative on reece's lpha television.
he decompression scenario was reminiscent of the 1999 crash that killed .. golfer ayne tewart, whose plane flew for nearly five hours after a sudden loss of cabin pressure killed or disabled all on board.
"he crew get oxygen, passengers will be on oxygen and there is enough in the tanks to get the aircraft to an altitude where you don't need the oxygen masks anymore," he added.
n reece, rime inister ostas aramanlis returned to thens from a holiday on the egean island of inos.
viation experts say that depressurization is rare, and that when it occurs, a warning horn sounds in the cockpit, and crew members are supposed to put on oxygen masks and descend to 10,000 feet, where there is enough oxygen for humans to function even in a depressurized aircraft.
he flight, a charter, had taken off from arnaka in yprus on its way to rague via thens.
any of the victims found in the sheared and burning wreckage were still wearing oxygen masks.
wo other people desperately tried to gain control of the plane.
``lthough there are precedents for both pilots losing consciousness, for it to happen on a large airliner like a oeing 737 with all the back-up systems they have does seem to be really quite extraordinary,'' ieran aly, editor of ir ransport ntelligence, said in an interview with .
bout one-third of the dead were children.
e called ypriot resident assos apadopoulos by telephone and expressed his condolences.
e called ypriot resident assos apadopoulos by telephone and expressed his condolences.
t was unclear whether they were passengers or pilots.
ow that did not happen (with the elios flight) is extremely strange.''
n ecember 2004, three passengers were hospitalized after a elios plane lost cabin pressure and made an emergency landing at the arnaka airport.
"e told me the pilots were unconscious ... he said: "arewell, cousin, here we're frozen."
tate-run news media reported that a malfunction in the aircraft's oxygen system might have precipitated the crash and that the cabin might have rapidly lost pressure.
eports also disclosed that passengers aboard the flight had sent text messages to relatives complaining of an "rtic chill" in the cabin with people starting to turn blue from the cold.
eports also disclosed that passengers aboard the flight had sent text messages to relatives complaining of an "rctic chill" in the cabin with people starting to turn blue from the cold.
odies, luggage and parts of the plane were scattered over 12 acres (5 hectares) of hillside.
its of human flesh, clothing, and luggage were scattered around the wreckage, which started brush fires around the area.
irplane cabins are pressurized so that the air remains breathable even at very high altitudes.
y unday afternoon, rescue workers at the site of the crash had recovered the so-called black boxes that contain recordings of flight data and the pilots' voices, said krivos solakis, head of the reek airline safety commission.
ate on unday, rescue teams said they had located one of the plane's "black boxes," two orange-colored devices that record flight data and voices of the pilots.
"lthough there are precedents for both pilots losing consciousness at the controls of the aircraft in the past, for it to happen on a large airliner like a oeing 737, with all the backup systems they have there, does seem to be really quite extraordinary," said ieran aly, editor of ir ransport ntelligence, a news agency that covers the industry.
ric oody, a former pilot, told ky television that the crew's failure to bring the plane down in altitude suggested they were overwhelmed by the situation, hinting at a major problem with the oxygen system.
 ,   
uropean nion () ransport ommissioner acques arrot also expressed his condolences to victims of the crash.
ven if the pilots somehow had become incapacitated by a drop in pressure, there would be no reason for the plane to crash straight away, the experts said.
uropean nion () ransport ommissioner acques arrot expressed his condolences to victims following a ypriot airliner crashed into a hill in reece earlier on unday.
reek civil aviation authorities alerted the air force in line with anti-terrorism measures.
reek civil aviation authorities alerted the air force in line with anti-terrorism measures.
he plane that crashed unday was built in 1998, a year before the airline was established.
``e have no indication whatsoever that this was a terrorist act,'' ypriot ransport inister arris hrassou said in a televised news conference at the anarca irport, where the flight originated.
elios airline officials refused to release the passenger list but said 48 of the passengers were "youth travelers" bound for rague, zech epublic, after a stopover in thens.
he plane was making continuous right-hand turns to show it had lost radio contact, he said.
ueling the relatives' anger were reports that the plane may have crashed due to a technical fault that had affected elios planes in the past.
he plane did not respond to radio calls.
"he most likely thing is that a technical fault was involved, but we are looking into all possible causes and details.
ngry relatives swarmed the counters at arnaca airport, hurling curses at the managers of an airline whose plane crashed in reece earlier unday, killing all passengers and crew on board.
outas said his cousin also told him he went to the cockpit to check what was wrong and saw the pilot "all blackened."
''ousin farewell, we're freezing,`` the passenger messaged, according to lpha , a reek network.
"t is with great sadness that  have learned of today's airliner crash near thens, which has cost the lives of all on board.
"t is with great sadness that  have learned of today's airliner crash near thens, which has cost the lives of all on board.
 man who said his cousin was on board reported receiving a mobile telephone text message from him shortly before the crash, saying the captain had ``turned blue'' and temperatures in the cabin had plummeted.
reek rime inister ostas aramanlis cut short a long holiday weekend and called an emergency mini-cabinet meeting.
reek rime inister aramanlis cut short a long holiday weekend and called an emergency mini-cabinet meeting.
t altitudes above 30,000 feet, a sudden decompression could plunge the temperature inside the plane below zero, and those aboard could begin to experience hypoxia and loss of consciousness within 10 to 30 seconds unless they were able to put on emergency oxygen masks, aviation experts say.
fter reporting the aircraft as "renegade," or unidentified, the pilots tracked the airliner at about 38,000 feet until it began to lose height and crashed sparking a blaze.
fter reporting the aircraft as "renegade", or unidentified, the pilots tracked the airliner at about 38,000 feet until it began to lose height and crashed sparking a blaze.
s police cordoned off part of the crash sites with bright orange tape, firefighting planes and helicopters swooped overhead to battle a brush fire started by the crash, which rekindled at the site throughout the day.
lackened bodies, tattered luggage and smoldering debris lay scattered among the pine trees in a scenic reek valley after a elios irways flight slammed into a mountainside and filled the air with acrid smoke.
n addition, there were no signs of a hijacking, such as a distress call, the officials said.
"e saw some fighter jets flying very low and after a few minutes we heard a very loud noise and saw pieces of the plane flying in the air," said pyros apachristou.
he worst airline crash in reek history is also one of the most mysterious.
"f the aircraft lost cabin pressure, either in the cockpit or the cabin, effectively everybody would be doomed within a short space of time," said hris ates, an aviation analyst at ane's ransport.
"t's possible some of the passengers on board, because of their age, because of their health or whatever, may have been able to last a bit longer," he said.
id the pilots not have the time to equip themselves?"
hough official sources suspected that an apparently technical problem could have caused the tragedy, accident investigators still faced a mystery over the last minutes of the doomed plane.
121         nthee arassava reported from thens, reece, for this article, and an isher from rague, zech epublic, and ome.
uspicions of a technical fault as the cause of the crash grew through the day as several of the callers said that they had experienced severe air conditioning problems when flying similar elios jets in recent months.
udden loss of cabin pressure would trigger a loud horn and caution lights, said ohn . ance, an air safety analyst and former ir orce and commercial pilot.
he plane went down in a pasture in outh akota after flying halfway across the nited tates on autopilot, as the five apparently became unconscious after the plane lost cabin pressure.
"here was no such thought," he told reporters after a lengthy cabinet meeting chaired by rime inister ostas aramanlis, who cut short his long weekend holiday and returned to thens.
ereaved and angry relatives flooded the airport in arnaka, some collapsing in grief, as senior reek ministers, including the country's prime minister, ostas aramanlis, broke off from their vacations to attend crisis talks in thens.
f a plane suffers a loss of air pressure, the crew typically has enough warning to try to get to a lower altitude.
"t is one of these things that can be serious ... but if it occurs, there should be an automatic deployment of oxygen masks," said avid aminski orrow, deputy news editor of the ritish-based magazine ir ransport ntelligence.
he cockpit voice recorder is likely to capture the sound of the warning horn, if it sounded, and conversation between the pilots about the problem.
n unday's crash, scorched debris, suitcases and bodies were scattered down the side of a hill and across a ravine 25 miles north of thens.
he plane that went down was manufactured seven years ago and delivered to elios in pril 2004.
irliners are pressurized by a system that draws air from the engines, which compress air for internal use.
heir identity was not clear, nor how long they were able to sustain their efforts.
"his is extremely difficult work, collecting bodies and putting out these fires.
n yprus, resident assos apadopoulos declared three days of official mourning.
elios, yprus' first private carrier, was established in 1999.
''hen a pilot has no communication with the control tower, the procedure dictates that other planes must accompany and help the plane land,`` hrassou, the ypriot transport minister, said.
ut that aircraft was a small earjet, not a commercial airliner, which has numerous back-up systems.
he authenticity of the message could not be verified, but the description would be in keeping with drastic loss of cabin pressure.
" rather suspect we're heading for a very complicated investigation."
n ctober 1999, a earjet carrying the golfer ayne tewart and four other people crashed in outh akota after flying hundreds of miles on autopilot.
"t really is all very peculiar," he added.
ne witness told euters that the plane's tail was cut off and that the remaining parts of the plane rolled down a hillside about 500 yards away from the tail.
 year earlier, another elios plane suffered engine problems, diverting to the reek holiday island of hodes.
irefighters and rescue workers sped to the wreckage as military helicopters patrolled overhead.
"he cabin pressure and the cockpit pressure are the same," said ates, noting that a failure should affect both equally.
 investigators were on their way to thens as  law requires them to help with the investigation whenever a -made aircraft is involved.
rash scene investigators wearing surgical masks said most bodies appeared to be intact with some badly burnt.
f the problem is not obvious from the wreckage, it may be discerned from tests on the blood of the victims, which will show what they were breathing before they died.
he plane _ carrying 121 people, more than a third of them children _ broke up into at least three pieces.
onstantinos ichas, a resident of rammatiko near the ancient city of arathon, was one of the first people on the scene unday.
ncapacitation of both pilots on a commercial jetliner is extremely rare.
"n explosive depressurization with damage.
t suggests multiple malfunctions that happened either too quickly or too subtly for the pilots to be aware of them or to act in time to remedy them, aviation experts said.
he oeing 737-300 was due to fly onto rague, zech epublic, after stopping in thens.
ne of the ypriot pilots sat slumped over the instrument panel.
``here's a lot here that doesn't make sense,'' said ance, who added: ``rovided the information from the fighter pilot is right, then we have a high, high probability that we had a malfunctioning crew oxygen system, that the crew didn't know it in time.''
yprus' radio and television stations cancelled their daily programs to relay uninterrupted coverage on the crash as people telephoned to seek news or speculate over what might have caused the crash.
eldzer, a former ir rance pilot, said on rance-nfo radio.
n a case with possible parallels, a lack of oxygen apparently caused the 1999 crash that killed golfer ayne tewart and four others aboard tewart's twin-engined jet.
ith its windows iced over, the plane finally plummeted into a field in outh akota.
"his latest incident shows that in spite of all that has already been done to improve the safety of urope's skies, we must intensify our joint efforts to ensure the very highest safety standards for all urope's air passengers and crew," he added.
"his latest incident shows that in spite of all that has already been done to improve the safety of urope's skies, we must intensify our joint efforts to ensure the very highest safety standards for all urope's air passengers and crew," he added.
specially at anarca, angry relatives blasted elios for providing information too slowly and scuffled with police while trying to storm the airline's offices.
ome said the cabin was freezing and the crew had to provide them with blankets while others said it became unbearably hot.
nly three parts of the plane remained intact _ the tail, the cockpit, and a large chunk of the fuselage.
he crash occurred on the eve of a main religious holiday in reece and yprus _ a public holiday devoted to the irgin ary.
his would typically be done over the sea rather than a mountainous area, aminski orrow said.
t is like standing on top of ount verest," aminski orrow said.
he impact ignited fires in the dry brush.
ive television broadcasts from the disaster area showed firefighting aircraft dousing the wreckage site with water as rescue workers and volunteers combed the region, collecting corpses.
hrough scenes aired by reek television stations, plane wreckage was scattered widely about the mountain.
"hings here are very difficult, they are indescribable."
y sympathies go out to the families and friends of the victims and all those affected by this tragic event," said arrot in a statement.
y sympathies go out to the families and friends of the victims and all those affected by this tragic event," said arrot in a statement.
"he pressurizing system is totally independent from the flying controls," oody told ky.
 oeing o. spokeswoman said the company had dispatched a team of experts to join the investigation.
here are procedures for rapid descent.
t appears it was mechanical damage but it's too early to say," he said.
he cause for the crash is yet to be known.
he presence of these two was especially mysterious, since by all appearances most of the other occupants of light 522 were incapacitated.
t airports in anarca, thens and rague, the flight's final destination, distraught families spent long hours with little information and rising anxiety.
 piece of the tail and a wheel from the landing gear were intact and recognizable.
reece's main opposition leader eorge apandreou visited the scene.
"as there a general poisoning (of some kind)?
 number of black-robed reek rthodox hristian priests were on the scene.
fter the investigation of that crash, a doctor with the ational ransportation afety oard said pilots' cognitive ability could fade away quickly when oxygen was limited, often faster than they realized.
''nfortunately, it appeared that the pilot was already dead, as was, possibly, everyone else on the plane.``
 valve at the back of the plane determines how fast air is let out of the fuselage.
erard eldzer, the head of rance's ir and pace useum, said many questions remained unanswered.