he family needs to know she's just getting started."
ust as binge eating disorder has many of the characteristics of bulimia, so does purging disorder.
t has been estimated that up to 30 percent of those in weight-loss programs have a binge-eating disorder.
" know  was motivated to gain weight when  got out of the hospital, but it wore off," she says.
o you feel out of control as you do so?
imilarly, alsh said, "we have people who are obese and binge but don't vomit," so they don't fit into the strict definition of bulimia nervosa, which requires both binging and purging.
ccording to the ational ating isorder ssociation, about 7 million .. females and 1 million males suffer from an eating disorder.
ut if it turns out that the characteristics of those who binge and vomit once a week are similar to those who do so twice a week, then we can loosen the criteria for bulimia nervosa."
nd until the iagnostic and tatistical anual panelists ask for more data, as they have for binge eating disorder, not much more will be known, eel said.
" never got the help that my daughter is getting now," she says.
ontaner had been warned months before by one of her daughter's teachers that manda might have an eating disorder.
echt says she doesn't talk about her eating disorder with her children, but she knows they love her and want her to stop.
edical professionals say they see more and more adult women like echt  that is, those older than college age  suffering from eating disorders.
n many cases, it's about continuing control, as is the case with
"e have people in that category with anorexia nervosa," but they still menstruate so they don't meet all the criteria for a formal diagnosis.
he disorder is much like bulimia nervosa, but without the purging.
s irst sees it, several criteria must be met before a diagnosis is pulled out of the ot therwise pecified category and into a stand-alone diagnosis.
"na's got me," she said in the hospital.
ontaner decided to do something about it.
"e have people doing more than ever," she says, "but they're still feeling that life is passing them by."
he sites have been around for more than two years and are the targets of groups such as the ational ssociation of norexia ervosa and ssociated isorders.
he causes of the disorder are still unknown, but up to half of all people with binge eating disorder have a history of depression.
he history of eating disorders has been a gradual one as the iagnostic and tatistical anual has been revised through the years.
hen ontaner looked for help, she found that at the time, aco did not have a specialist in eating disorder therapy.
ontaner said she still couldn't believe it, but this time she confronted her daughter.
ne study looking at vereaters nonymous found that 70 percent of the members had a binge eating disorder, hapira said.
" started to have more and more mid-life women who had eating disorders,' she explains.
"hen a person has an eating disorder, it becomes a family problem," echt says.
he does not eat in restaurants or at other people's homes, unless it can't be avoided.
"t is important to stress, however, that eating disorders are not about food and weight.
"e could have decided to call something sadistic personality disorder," he said, "but if there's no treatment, what would be the point?"
hen a new category is created in the manual, he said, "you're trying to identify a category that will help patients get treatment."
ccording to the bible of psychiatric diagnosis, the merican sychiatric ssociation's iagnostic and tatistical anual,anorexia must be accompanied by cessation of menstrual periods for at least three months in a row, and bulimia must involve vomiting or other forms of purging at least twice a week, on average.
he merican sychiatric ssociation's manual has a ot therwise pecified category for many disorders, whenever symptoms are so vague, so mild or so untreatable that it doesn't seem to warrant the full-fledged diagnosis.
ow, in the diagnostic category of eating disorders, the search for greater specificity in the ot therwise pecified grab bag is generating much attention.
hat was going to make me perfect," she says.
" was back to being deathly afraid of gaining weight.
or those who think they might have an eating problem, he suggests two questions: o you eat a lot of food in a short period?
ard as it may be to do so, unnell said, friends and family have to accept that they are powerless.
 would say ' just don't like to eat,"' she says.
"hat's what this disease does to you.
eople with purging disorder, eel said, are of normal weight, and they purge after eating normal or even small amounts of food.
"ooking back on it now,  learned to lie, and that was something  didn't do before," she says.
he stress led her to control the one thing she could  her body.
he major complications of binge eating disorder are the diseases that accompany obesity.
"he materials are designed to be available to the kids so that they can pick one up and they don't have to talk to anybody," she said.
"t's a terrible situation to be surrounded by food when that's all that you are thinking about," he said.
hose with the disorder frequently eat large amounts of food while feeling at a loss to control their eating.
nlike eating disorders such as bulimia nervosa or anorexia where victims are predominantly female, the ratio of female to male binge eaters is about 3-to-2.
"hey don't have to ask anybody for anything.
hese criteria have to be met before binge eating disorder, purging disorder or any other condition emerges out of the  grab bag.
he third criterion for removing a condition from the ot therwise pecified category is the trickiest to meet.
s motivated as she was in her quest to look perfect, she was just as determined to beat the eating disorder.
mma had been in treatment for several weeks and had not gained a pound.
bout one out of every five people with an eating disorder will die from the disease.
"'ve learned that anorexia was a way for me to deal with my problems.
"ou can be sexy and attractive in mid-life, but that doesn't mean you'll have to be the same size you were when you got married," she says.
" can see now how bad they are," mma says of the sites she once frequented.
or echt, the eating disorders were part of her life for many years, but she didn't admit it to herself, and others, until the mid-1990s.
he criterion of an effective treatment has prevented many conditions from being entered in the iagnostic and tatistical anual.
"hat's one of most compelling reasons to get something out of the ot therwise pecified category," said r. ichael irst, associate professor of clinical psychiatry at olumbia.
"f you feel that there's a homogeneous group of patients in there for which there's a treatment, the fact that it's called ot therwise pecified really obscures it, hindering treatment, hindering research," he said.
he is also facing her own past as an anorexic and bulimic.
esearchers in the new study, which was funded by institutional grants and mgen, the developer of a drug based on the hormone, began looking at people who may not have enough leptin because of low body fat.
"eptin doesn't have only one function," she said.
hile several factors contributed to mma's anorexia, she knows that for the three months prior to her hospitalization, the pro-na sites were instrumental in worsening her condition.
he's gaining some weight and is now talking more rationally.
"ou didn't hear anything about it in schools.
ut she is anorexic and has suffered from the disease, and bulimia, on and off since she was 14.
 can't do this to them anymore," she said.
o date, there are no approved medications to treat binge-eating disorder, but a large, multi-center study may offer hope to the 2 percent of the population who suffer from it.
hat type of encouragement alarms the anorexia association and other groups that are asking: hat can be more harmful than encouraging people to stop eating?
"hat we really need to do is collect data," alsh said.
"omen can feel shameful because many of the behaviors  like the binging and purging chewing and spitting out and over-exercising  are not understood," says ully, who sees several adults with eating disorders each week.
"f anything, and after all this is over,  will have learned to become a healthy eater," she said.
" lot of kids think they can save the person themselves; if they just meet and have sleep-overs and talk about this and teach them how to eat, it will be ," carano-sika said.
norexia nervosa affects 0.5 to 3.7 percent  or about 1.5 million to 11 million merican women  at some point in life, according to the ational nstitute of ental ealth.
ut psychiatrists would say that neither one falls into the strict definition of anorexia nervosa, the most severe eating disorder, or its relative, bulimia nervosa.
ith the manual continually under revision, the ot therwise pecified grab bag is the place where new diagnoses emerge.
nstead these women, and thousands like them, would fall into a category that doctors have been relying on for years, a vague nondiagnosis known by the acronym : eating disorder not otherwise specified.
" will never forget the look in her face," ontaner said.
roblems between my parents," she says.
hen word about manda's ordeal got around her school, five of her classmates who also had eating disorders came forward, ontaner said.
hat's when  decided to start ifelines."
he says she made "my lifestyle choice" and was a "proud anorexic"  the moniker for pro-na followers.
nline search results for "pro-na" include sites warning of the dangers of anorexia.
hen they hit 50 and couldn't lose weight, it resurfaced.
norexia was never about being skinny.
espite her brush with death, she believed she was in control of one thing: losing weight.
r. arbara orkey, president of the orth merican ssociation for the tudy of besity and a professor of medicine and biochemistry at oston niversity, said the study had found a "creative use of leptin," but she wasn't surprised.
his week, mma is finishing a 30-day program at an out-of-state hospital that specializes in eating disorders.
efore she left home for treatment, mma was feeling guilty that her illness was stressing out her family.
he answer, she believes, is to become mindful of every moment.
"t's very difficult to learn more about a problem if you never ask any questions about it."
he beginnings of mma's anorexia is a sensitive topic for her.
"ut," he continued, "you're worried that this category is going to be applied to normal people as well."
"t's no longer about control or the desire to be skinny," says echt.
"ecause it affects you and all your loved ones."
r they might binge and vomit once a week, but to qualify as bulimic they would have to vomit at least twice a week.
ut it failed, said irst, because no treatment existed.
he new study will test the effectiveness of topiramate in 350 binge eaters from around the country, hapira said.
ventually, the hope is, the uncertainties will be resolved, and the woman with anorexia who still menstruates and the woman with bulimia who only purges once a week, will be able to get the diagnosis and treatment that they need.
"ll the knowledge base we currently have relates to people who vomit twice a week.
veryone can agree that these women have some sort of disordered eating.
nother candidate for a new eating disorder in the fifth edition of the manual can be thought of as the flip side of binge eating, a condition that has been labeled "purging disorder" by r. amela eel, an associate professor of psychology at the niversity of owa.
he first requirement is that a significant number of patients must be affected, he said.
n the current version of the diagnostic manual, published in 1994, one condition  binge eating disorder  was pulled out of  and listed as a "provisional diagnostic category," the first step in the process of achieving its own diagnosis.
ollowing hristmas break during her senior year in high school, she was hospitalized for dehydration, low blood pressure and low blood sugar.
"n the coming years, we will certainly have to face the problem of anorexia and bulimia," in talian children.
y early last summer, she discovered the pro-na sites after watching a documentary on television.
he pro-na and pro-ia sites also spurred an online movement to warn people of the sites.
n ctober alone, the group persuaded nternet providers to remove 58 pro-na and pro-ia (short for bulimia) sites.
he attention drove her to lose more weight.
"hat letter just woke me up," said the friend, an anorexic who wants to remain anonymous.
riends and family need to realize that an anorexic looking in the mirror does not see the same emaciated figure they do.
he is appalled they get on the nternet in the first place.
"e traditionally think of anorexia and bulimia affecting those of college or high school age, but  found that they were also affecting two groups of middle-aged women as well."
any are dealing with depression and loss of self-esteem.
here was no fear of being caught; it was just empty.
"hen you're sitting with your son, if you are (really experiencing the moment), that will lead to a feeling of fullness.
eehan, of the ational ssociation of norexia ervosa and ssociated isorders, says the campaign to pull down sites promoting anorexia will continue.
he first group included those who'd had an eating problem in their youth but had resolved it.
"his is the matter of what we call false positives," irst said.
xperts working on iagnostic and tatistical anual panels must ask how close the condition is to behavior that could be considered normal.
eel, on the other hand, prefers the term "mixed eating disorder" over .
he "provisional" designation highlights the need for more research into a condition's prevalence and treatment, and highlighting binge eating disorder in this way was a prelude to its being named as a separate diagnosis in the manual that is to appear in 2012.
ut neither meets the strict criteria for bulimia nervosa.
iagnosing psychiatric conditions is more of an art than a science, and the ot therwise pecified label reflects the imprecision of that art.
"'ve cried a lot because  look at what 'm doing to people who have tried to help me.
(ne woman dropped out of the study.)
er husband was her caretaker when her health got so bad she couldn't walk herself to the bathroom.
ventually she was admitted to an inpatient treatment facility.
"ne of her peers turned to her and told her she needed to go to treatment," ones says.
"eople who go to these sites are motivated by the images.
ut when that wasn't enough, she went online to learn how to lose more weight "safely."
he struggled at first and wanted to come back to ustin.
he decided later to withhold her name to avoid more stress on her family.
"ou start believing that starvation is good.
hose who answer "yes" to both should consider whether they have a binge-eating disorder.
t is not the intention of people who host these sites, but they are helping people commit suicide," she says.
nstead, she suggests talking to friends and family to organize an intervention in a comfortable place.
he association has had limited success in persuading nternet providers to shut down the sites because they can be harmful to minors, but the sites reappear through other providers.
"ut a spotlight on whatever you're doing," she says.
"he question is how, at mid-life, can you develop a stronger and healthier body and self, not just be busy trying to sculpt your body into impossible weights and shapes."
hile the reasons for adult eating disorders vary widely, a majority of sufferers, if not previously anorexic or bulimic, have dealt with weight issues at some point in their lives, says lger-ayer.
n excruciating feature of the disorder is that it can seem to unfold in slow motion in front of friends and family as the sufferer gets progressively thinner.
 very small study, led by researchers at the eth srael eaconess edical enter and at assachusetts eneral ospital and published recently in the ew ngland ournal of edicine, found that leptin restored menstrual periods in a few female athletes who hadn't had periods for an average of 5 1/2 years.
ut alsh of olumbia said that would be merely a cosmetic change.
norexia nervosa is a psychological disorder in which the sufferer becomes exceedingly thin and still believes he or she is overweight.
"he payoff for someone who hosts a site is that it encourages them to stay with their program," says ivian eehan, founder of the ational ssociation of norexia ervosa and ssociated isorders.
hey can pick one up and take it home."
n intervention does not always work the first time.
ental health officials have estimated that 0.5 percent to 3.7 percent of females will suffer from the potentially life-threatening disorder in their lifetime.
r. athan hapira, an assistant professor of psychiatry of the niversity of lorida's ollege of edicine, is among the researchers testing the effectiveness of topiramate, a drug developed to treat the convulsions and seizures of epilepsy, in controlling binge eating.
lmost all who have this disorder are either overweight or obese.
 small study of some 60 patients with binge eating disorder showed that those who received the topiramate rather than a placebo binged less often and also lost weight.
"ow that we understand so much more about what this hormone does, we can target it appropriately for the right condition."
s experts debate what to do about   pull out distinct disorders from the grab bag category, change the diagnostic criteria for the existing disorder, give the grab bag a more scientific-sounding name  people with disordered eating are left in a kind of therapeutic limbo.
ulimia was renamed bulimia nervosa in the next edition, which came out in 1987.
or binge eating disorder, for instance, they must ask: hen is such behavior a true psychiatric condition, and when is it the kind of thing that almost everyone engages in every hanksgiving?
norexia nervosa first appeared in the version of the manual published in 1980, and bulimia appeared for the first time in the same edition.
ts definitions help determine such practical matters as insurance reimbursement, competence and eligibility for disability.
he image haunted her so much that she mustered the courage during a semester abroad to write to her friend.
he ulane niversity-affiliated iver aks ospital ating isorders reatment enter in ew rleans uses several approaches simultaneously in treating anorexics.
he director of the incinnati sychotherapy nstitute, the author is a frequent guest on  and radio shows, including " his orning," "oday," "prah" and "48 ours."
ut mental health professionals counsel gentle persuasion over hard lobbying.
reatment was given until they responded or up to three months, whichever came first.
atja drew up the menu herself without any medical advice or help from a nutritionist.
or women who grew up with wiggy and air-brushed photos, says earny-ooke, reality hasn't been easy.
uthors of the study also said there were some preliminary signs that the hormone improved bone density, which begins to decline when women stop menstruating.
escribing how she survived on a dangerously low 300 calories a day, the girl with an  of 143 says she became an expert on vitamin supplements that helped keep her alive.
er favorite pastime is to sit in front of the television with a gallon of mocha-chip ice cream.
he has held down a number of different jobs and is convinced she can best help her clients, who often come in groups, like the members of the "ick und duenn", or the at and hin, association.
ention anorexia and images of young women immediately come to mind: ary ate lsen, racy old, amie ynn iscalia.
he carried baggies with her to restaurants during family meals to sneak the food off her plate.
he young woman did seek professional help.
hildren star in one out of every three commercials on talian television, and 40 percent of all ads sell food products, according to the study by ome's apienza university.
hen she admitted that she threw up several times a day at school."
sing grant money to help with expenses, ontaner began traveling the state, speaking at other schools about eating disorders.
mma saw the material as a real education in eating healthier.
t came from shoving her fingers down her throat six to 10 times a day.
he lost 10 kilogrammes (22 pounds), then put the weight all back on again in no time and was admitted to hospital for three months in 2003.
"s long as she wasn't eating them,  didn't see any harm," her mother says.
urging that many times a day caused manda to lose 60 pounds in about a year's time.
hen a hospital psychiatrist recommended that her daughter go to an acute-care center for treatment, ontaner discovered that exas had no such facility dedicated to eating disorders.
ll they can do, he said, is keep speaking honestly about their concerns.
mma knows she must confront her past difficulties and family issues.
er parents suspected anorexia for months.
oor body image dating back to a swim meet manda won when she was 7 led to her battle with eating disorders, ontaner said.
he thought mma needed to go to an inpatient facility.
ites with names such as "ouse of ins," "tarving for erfection" and "are to the ones" convinced mma that starvation was fulfilling.
he settled for a facility in lorida that the family could afford.
"eople fear they will be judged or that what they are doing could possibly be a childish thing."
ut in others, they believe it may be caused by subtler changes in body composition caused by diet and exercise.
isa oy tried to stay non-confrontational in her letter to her old college friend.
mma says she realized how sick she was when she began stuffing food down the sofa.
he hosts of such eb sites, experts think are female anorexics who find support for their own conditions through the forums they lead.
o have a better chance at recovery, mma and her family must deal with complicated issues plaguing the family for years.
ot only do they offer support and encouragement to continue, but the sites offer competition for how low they can weigh and how little they can eat.
hree of the women, one of whom had not had a period in 14 years, ovulated and had menstrual bleeding.
hima agreed that leptin might have potential as a fertility treatment.
ut purging is not always easy in her college dormitory, with four young women sharing a single bathroom, so she ends up vomiting, on average, about once a week.
en, too, are being diagnosed as bulimic or anorexic at an increasing rate, says r. haron lger-ayer, who works in the division of clinical nutrition at lbany edical enter ospital.
bout five or six years ago, earney-ooke began noticing something disturbing in her therapy sessions.
riends should involve adults such as parents, counselors, teachers _ someone the person trusts, carano-sika said.
" am 57, but  have a body that is 75 or 80," echt says.
octors believe some of those cases are caused by stress.
he lifetime prevalence of bulimia is higher  from 1.1 to 4.2 percent of women  with a similar age and sex distribution.
he goes without eating all day, and starting at 6 p.m. she eats nonstop, whatever she can get her hands on.
o that they don't feel stigmatised, nothing out front or in the entryway suggests that people are entering a restaurant that caters for those with special needs.
he same when you're listening to music  close your eyes and really take it in.
ut earney-ooke says that needn't be the case.
ccording to the , 80 percent of adolescent girls feel bad about their bodies, and 28 percent of boys are dissatisfied with their weight.
"hese are triggers for some women to get reacquainted with an eating pattern or coping style that worked for them while in college," says lger-ayer.
n the 1980s, there was an effort to include "sadistic personality disorder."
"ou cannot personally put yourself on the hook for it," he said.
s each day goes by, full recovery becomes less and less likely for these women, and others like them, experts say.
inge eating disorder is a newly recognized condition that probably affects millions of mericans.
irst is a member of the planning group that is directing the enormous undertaking of revising the manual for its fifth edition.
hey can also ask for small portions," said ichbaum.
hese include diabetes, high blood pressure, high cholesterol levels, gallbladder disease, heart disease and certain types of cancer.
ow calorie, sugar-free maple syrup, low-calorie salad dressing and a iet oke were displayed on top of a cabinet in her hospital room.
 former anorexic and bulimic who did not receive professional treatment as a young woman, she had seen the signs for months.
nd the toll of the disease, which is defined as a mental illness, goes beyond the emotional and physical effects felt by one person.
ther friends helped her find professional help.
unnell advises having a folder at the ready with names of medical professionals and helpful eb addresses.
"ying goes with the illness, until you are ready to stop denying that you are ill."
hile bulimics purge what they eat, anorexics essentially starve themselves.
ontaner said she sat in horror as her daughter detailed how easy it was to eat between classes at school, then go to the bathroom after class started and force herself to vomit.
"hey find a community with a lot in common.
 looked in the mirror and  looked , but when  saw still pictures of me  looked sick.
 didn't see choices,  saw expectations."
he tricked them by strapping ankle weights under her pant legs, using the advice of eb sites known collectively as "pro-na" (na is short for anorexia).
he got on the nternet and scored multiple hits when she typed in the appropriate search words.
mma, who was in a foggy state when she was brought to the hospital, somehow remembered to bring her "comfort foods" with her.
t became clear, she says, that she wasn't going to be able to achieve the way she had in high school.
er appetite began to disappear when her parents split up while she was a teenager.
"he main idea of my book is that you can't change your relationship with food or your body until you change the way you relate to people in general.
ome 30 or so people with eating disorders have hesitantly pushed their way through the doors at ehnsucht in the month since it opened.
n group therapy with other teen girls, she admitted she had been hiding food.
his is how mma and a fan of eb sites promoting anorexia, nearly starved herself to death:
"t serves another function and this highlights that."
he new work on leptin may offer clues to the condition's cause.
hey became fast friends in college, sharing rides home and going to parties.
ne function of leptin, which was discovered in 1994, is to regulate appetite.
hen she reached 118, she was in the grasp of the disease.
y mind has been on a rollercoaster.
s recently as 10 years ago it was a 1-to-10 male-to-female ratio.
"ou can't imagine anybody wanting to throw up."
"ot many therapists want to deal with it because eating disorders have the highest mortality rate of any mental illness, and the patients are extremely difficult to work with."
"he real difference between 'grazing' and binge eating is eating much more than normal in a short period of time, often less than two hours.
he could choose, or limit, what she ate and exercise often.
earney-ooke says our culture has taught us that the more we do, the more we'll get out of life.
"aybe  have been successful in other ways, but  always feel  am not measuring up."
he other group had no prior history of eating disorders, but a life event  a divorce, loss of parent or job  triggered an eating disorder.
he prognosis for mma's recovery is guarded.
oday, anorexia is a part of her life, almost a routine.
n appetite-curbing hormone that failed to live up to its early buzz as a possible key to slowing obesity is now being probed as a potential aid for women who suffer from infertility and eating disorders.
"o if you go at someone really harshly or in a confrontational way, you're just going to evoke a real defensive reaction."
ating disorders are about problems and conflicts that are unresolved in a person's life.
"chool nurses and counselors don't have the information needed when a student, teacher, coach or family member comes to them for help."
" think baby boomers were taught that if you ate right and took those vitamins and exercised, you were never going to grow old," says nn earney-ooke.
"hat is important is that the girls take the first step, that they at least have a taste.
any of the sites no longer exist, but many still offer this type of advice: "url up in a ball if you have hunger pains."
mall groups are better, carano-sika said, because the person may be sheepish, embarrassed or defensive.
"e confront their body image distortion while teaching them to eat normally so they can get to a normal body weight.
ll those kinds of memories came out in therapy years later."
r. ina carano-sika, a psychologist, said anorexics need to be made aware there is a problem before it becomes severe.
econd, there has to be evidence of an existing and effective treatment.
"f 'm a clinician and  get a call from a school saying, 'ey, 've got a person with mixed eating disorder coming over,'  don't know if 'm going to be seeing someone who weighs 80 pounds or 280 pounds," he said.
hether depression is a cause or effect is unclear, according to the ational nstitutes of ealth.
fter a binge, he said, binge eaters feel disgusted with themselves.
hapira said that when topiramate was used for epilepsy patients, many reported that they also had a marked decrease in appetite and even lost weight.
he said the mixed eating disorder label "may have the benefit of eliminating the false impression that  is somehow less severe or less clinically significant than so-called full-threshold eating disorders."
ome psychiatrists want to create a different label for , calling it instead "mixed eating disorder" or "atypical eating disorder."
ight now, purging disorder is relatively hidden, buried in the  category.
or instance, the diagnosis of sperger's syndrome, a variant of autism, was pulled from a collection of disorders previously labeled ervasive ersonality isorder ot therwise pecified.
ohn llen writes for the aco ribune-erald.
ther battles ontaner has waged include seeking a change in state legislation that would force insurance companies to pay for treatment of eating disorders.
er mother knows the challenges ahead involve not only mma but also her own relationship with her domestic partner.
hey helped her find an identity, albeit one that led her to the emergency room in ustin.
t school, some classmates called mma (not her real name) "keletor."
"t's the danger of defining as a psychiatric syndrome a set of symptoms that normal people have."
ndeed ehnsucht is open to everyone, which helps the owners make money, at least enough to be encouraged by in the establishment's early stages.
ut they also help determine something more elusive, and probably more important: whether someone's behavior should be considered a personality quirk or a symptom of mental illness.
 couldn't think straight," she recalls.
he encouragement is often accompanied by photos of stick-like models.
uring her daughter's 45-day stay, ontaner's anger turned to action.
"ood is the drug we all must quit," wrote someone going by the name of hai in a pro-na journal.
t is funded by rtho ceil harmaceutical, which makes the drug.
"o one comes out of such a treatment fixed," ones says.
magine a 20-year-old woman who refuses to eat anything except carrots and toast because she is afraid of gaining weight, even though she is 5-foot-8 and weighs only 99 pounds.
"ike skin and bones," oy recalled.
et the excessive dieting, accompanied by breakneck exercising, nearly killed her.
mma left the hospital after eight days and began counseling and participation in a peer treatment group.
"his represents essentially a new era for leptin," said r. ean han, one of the researchers exploring new uses for the hormone.
"hat is such a gross disease," said manda's mother, awn ontaner.
he strong-willed girl was confident this summer, cocky even, that she was going to walk out of the hospital and get better through an outpatient program.
" told myself that being 5-5 and 118 pounds was my ideal weight.
"roviders have mission statements that they will not support sites that can injure children.
er menstrual cycle had stopped seven months earlier.
 inge eating gets a closer look ew study tests drug that curbs overeaters' urge
ulimia, which like anorexia is predominantly contracted by women, is a virtual food obsession that leads to eating binges followed by acts to make up for it like self-induced vomiting or excessive exercise.
he was convinced that her journey into self-imposed starvation would somehow improve her life.
norexia and bulimia typically begin in early to mid-adolescence.
ou heard about safe sex, drugs,  ... but you never heard anything about eating disorders.
atja and laudia consider that they have recovered and began helping others like them last month by opening the first restaurant in ermany, and perhaps in all of urope, where anorexics and bulimics can eat without feeling ashamed.
hen, month by month, year by year, isa oy noticed her friend getting thinner, alarmingly so.
ut nne ucharme-ones, an ustin psychotherapist who specializes in eating disorders and treated mma, was not confident about the girl's chances for successful recovery as an outpatient.
n the meantime, people like manda will continue the daily struggle to keep their disorder in check.
'm starting to feel things again, like us moving around so much when  was younger.
ut she offers a crucial warning to friends: o not try to "save" someone on your own.
han, at the eth srael medical center, said researchers are already planning a longer study of a larger group of women.
ccording to research done by he enfrew enter in hiladelphia, the country's first free-standing and largest treatment facility for eating disorders, the age distribution has changed: 23.5 percent of the women treated at enfrew are now over 35.
he began by "eating healthy," she says, choosing salads and giving up fast food.
nd the shame can by magnified for older people, says ully.
n a letter home just before hanksgiving, she called the treatment center a "winter camp."
ut for now, the materials are sitting on the same 11 pallets they were shipped to her on.
n array of doctors  a family physician, a psychologist, an eating disorders therapist and a nutrition counselor  helped her begin her battle against anorexia.
hey usually develop a weight problem earlier in life and do not do as well in these programs.
ears of claiming she wasn't hungry, eating small meals such as an apple and a salad, running errands or taking a walk while her co-workers went to lunch or purging when she ate more than made her comfortable were all part of echt's routine.
t was originally thought that increasing leptin might suppress the appetites of obese people.
utritional counseling is a valuable part of the program," clinical director usan illard says.
ix years later, she still keeps the letter.
"ithin widely used diagnostic interviews, if a person has never had a low weight and denies a history of binge eating, the interviewer skips all questions regarding the use of vomiting, laxatives or diuretics to control weight," eel wrote in an e-mail message.
he eating disorders association cautions not to worsen the situation with admonitions like "ou just need to eat!"
 baby boomer herself at 49, earney-ooke is a psychologist who has written a book she hopes will help: "hange our ind, hange our ody: eeling ood bout ourself fter ge 40."
er periods are irregular, but she has never gone more than three months without menstruating.
 guess my biggest work has been in trying to create a secure sanctuary at home so  can live a life without my eating disorder."
hile media images continue to create cultural definitions of beauty associated with thinness, middle-aged women often experience other stress-inducing problems, such as separation or divorce, empty-nest syndrome and physical changes associated with their age, says lger-ayer.
any baby boomers are in for a big surprise.
ccording to homas albesaner, a medical expert on anorexia and bulimia, the establishment could be helpful as "a reserved space for people who are returning to a normal life, but who are still sensitive about food."
he condition, caused by the way the brain regulates the reproductive system, can also affect some women who are overly thin.
ales are also diagnosed with anorexia, but at a much lower rate.
ost significantly, she says, the disease rules her social life.
ut she expressed concern that the term would limit the enthusiasm for teasing out what other identifiable conditions lie within the  category.
t relates to a kind of diagnosis-creep.
(iane hun writes for he ainesville (la.) un.)
icardo andara writes for the ustin merican-tatesman.
eredith oss writes for the ayton aily ews.
eidi trickler, an eating disorder specialist at rovidence ealthcare etwork's eaul enter who arrived after ontaner started ifelines, helped write the materials.
"'m the only specialist in the area," trickler said.
sychologist aria 'lessio said her study "shows the threat caused by commercials aimed at children and featuring foodstuffs, because it distorts one's natural relationship with food".
" learnt how to eat again through my therapy," she said.
ut studies found heavy people tended to have plenty of leptin and adding more didn't help.
" apologize if 'm wrong," she wrote, but she hoped her friend would seek help for her problem.
"ne of the hallmarks of the illness is denial of the illness," unnell said.
he names of the dishes are often poetic.
mma talked openly and initially agreed her real name could be used in the newspaper.
ext to the entry is a photo of a woman in a crop top with every rib bone showing.
o had her partner of 20 years, whom mma calls "honey."
norexia nervosa, from the reek word meaning "loss of appetite", is an affliction stemming from a fear of gaining weight and leads sufferers to deny their hunger and essentially starve themselves.
"here's a lack of recognition that this disorder is very common and treatable," hapira said.
er parents saw their daughter wasting away and felt helpless.
unger pangs made me happy," she says.
nother woman, who is also 20 and also 5-foot-8, has an opposite eating pattern.
he owner of "ehnsucht", or ostalgia, in the erman capital's iergarten quarter is atja ichbaum, and she too has come a long way back from the brink.
he guilt of possibly failing in her mission to lose weight drove her to stay focused.
ontaner established the nonprofit ifelines oundation for ating isorders with the goal of establishing the first acute-care facility in exas dedicated solely to treating eating disorders.
he won't divulge what spurred the dieting because she says she doesn't want to hurt anyone's feelings.
omen with low body fat, including athletes and those with eating disorders, often stop menstruating, developing a condition called hypothalamic amenorrhea.
o far the insurance lobby has blocked attempts to have anorexia and bulimia added to the list of serious mental illnesses that insurance companies are mandated to cover, which includes schizophrenia and bipolar disorder.
"here was also an incident not long after that when she was in choir and someone told her she should be wearing a tent rather than a robe.
he researchers gave injections of mgen's synthetic leptin to eight competitive women athletes, all with hypothalamic amenorrhea.
hen eating out, "order something you know you hate."
ome exercise obsessively; others use laxatives or force themselves to vomit.
" have heard one resounding theme," she said.
he obsession with one's body provides an escape from dealing with the real underlying issues," illard says.
he family has moved around to several schools, including one in lorida, to get away from harassment and physical threats made against mma because she has two gay moms.
"n the long term, this is very damaging for children."
er vital organs, her heart in particular, began shutting down.
"veryone probably binges at some point, particularly during 'sanctioned' events like hanksgiving dinner," hapira said.
housands of mericans notice friends or daughters going beyond skinny to skeletal, and the urge to confront loved ones showing signs of anorexia _ "ill you please just eat?!"
r. exford hima, at the niversity of ennsylvania chool of edicine's ivision of ndocrinology, iabetes and etabolism, said the study suggested that leptin is the signal that links fat tissue to the brain and instructs it to control menstruation.
ince then, a long period of therapy has begun bearing fruit, she explained recently, sitting on one of two huge lounge chairs placed in the restaurant's entrance to make the clients "feel at home".
he injections raised the women's leptin levels to those of normal women or higher.
he was fascinated by the discussion groups and the links to get more information.
he images offer what the sites claim is "thinspiration" in times of weakness.
ontaner is trying to raise the estimated $40,000 needed to get the items distributed.
egin, she advises, by establishing a realistic weight and shape for yourself, based on genetics and how much time you're willing to exercise.
he turning point came in late ctober.
" don't think  learned what  really enjoyed,  just performed.
ome 600,000 people suffer from bulimia.
iagnostic labels, said alsh, "allow big shortcuts."
apital egion ssociation for ating isorders:
lowly, however, she heeded the advice that other site visitors offered: ood is the enemy.
esearchers said they envisioned possible fertility treatments, help for thin athletes at risk of bone fractures, and restoration of menstruation to patients recovering from anorexia.
he materials include handouts, posters and booklets with information on the disease, how to get help and, most importantly, ontaner said, contact information on each piece.
ecause no laboratory tests or other objective criteria exist for making psychiatric diagnoses, the merican sychiatric ssociation's manual is the definitive arbiter of the line between normal and abnormal.
" right now is a real hodgepodge," said r. . imothy alsh, professor of pediatric psychopharmacology at olumbia.
"t's exhausting, not physically, not emotionally.
'lessio said 40 commercials in every hour of programming were dedicated to food.
taly's  channels broadcast twice as many commercials featuring food as their  counterparts, threatening children who watch them with serious eating disorders such as bulimia and anorexia, according to a study published here uesday.
ontaner, who thought the weight loss was from rigorous exercise and reduced food portions, was just glad her daughter was looking better.
"he looks like a azi war victim," her mother said at her bedside.
he took dinner to her room and flushed it down the toilet.
mma's mother had a bout with alcoholism and sought treatment.
ith an anonymous $64,000 donation, she had enough educational materials published to send to all 20 ducation ervice enters in exas.
rom her bed in the intensive care unit at hildren's ospital of ustin in ugust, mma talked about her journey to be "perfect," which to her meant being rail thin.
earch engine ahoo declined to address pro-na sites specifically but noted that a service agreement with members prohibits them from posting any content that is unlawful or harmful.
he maintains a normal weight of 130 by occasionally forcing herself to vomit.
ype in the right search words on oogle and nearly 5,000 results are displayed.
oon after, ontaner learned that manda had also begun self-mutilation by cutting herself, a behavioral step not uncommon in people with eating disorders, according to experts.
ontaner, her husband and her ex-husband, manda's father, all had health insurance, but the three plans together didn't come close to covering the cost of treatment.
he temptation to overeat will strike most of us during the holiday season, but for those who suffer from a binge-eating disorder, holiday feasting can be self-inflicted hell.
s a result, they often eat alone or very rapidly, and will eat until they are uncomfortably full.
"ow, all of a sudden, they're getting older and struggling with natural changes."
inge eating disorder, hapira emphasizes, is not the same as indulging in an occasional binge at the table or "grazing" through an array of buffet offerings.
"he climbed out of the pool, and some kid standing nearby said, 'ee,  didn't know hamu was swimming today,' " ontaner said.
"he more you can slow down and pay attention, the fuller you will feel, and you won't have to be turning to food or alcohol."
he 29-year-old started restricting her food consumption and exercising excessively while a freshman in college.
or now, she's winning, and the only thing adorning her fingers these days is a wedding ring with the words " ove ou," from husband onnie arsh.
ut he had questions about its use as a treatment for eating disorders, noting that anorexia is primarily a psychiatric disorder whose root cause should be addressed before leptin is considered.
o some observers, this new attention comes not a moment too soon.
ive of the remaining seven showed promising results, according to the study.
ut the damage didn't come from turning wrenches in tight quarters under the hood of a car.
mma, who once carried 150 pounds on her 5-foot-5 athletic frame and was teased about being chunky, succeeded over a year's time in dropping pounds, winning the praise of boys who thought she looked hot and girls who envied her body.
hese factors can act as reminders and cause the eating disorder to resurface.
"he uture of " was a topic at an international meeting on eating disorders in msterdam, the etherlands, last month, and it is the title of a book expected to be released in urope next year.
he teen kept purging until she was caught by her brother, who told their mother.
r. illiam chlaff, president of the ociety for eproductive ndocrinology and nfertility and a professor at the niversity of olorado ealth ciences enter in enver, said the study was "very nicely designed" and had made an "important first observation" that needed further study.
"lder sufferers build a strong identity around this," ully says.
lus people can't go through a typical day without hearing about the tkins or outh each diets.
"specially as an adult, you know you are a smart person, and intellectually it is the dumbest thing," says alker.
'hat's what  want to look like,"' says racie trucker, director of a ue abe, a entral exas eating disorders outpatient program.
ith her white chef's hat, laudia looks at home in the kitchen of this erlin restaurant, but her culinary talents are being used to feed people who, like her, suffer from eating disorders.
ates are lower among men and teenage boys.
"oys starring with their mothers are shown eating, while girls watch their mothers do the housework."
"o ask them to seek recovery, or make changes, is like whipping away a security blanket."
he plans on calling it "he aven."
ach has already suffered some of the permanent effects associated with the disease  which can include weakened hearts, severe osteoporosis, teeth that break easily, brittle bones, loss of stamina and, most likely, a shortened life span, doctors say.
"ou want to avoid getting into a full frontal assault because that almost always ends badly," said r. oug unnell, a clinical psychologist and board president of the ational ating isorders ssociation.
uch is at stake in whether a condition is elevated to the status of a full-fledged diagnosis.
he exercises to the point of exhaustion five mornings a week because, though she is bone-thin, she thinks her thighs are too flabby.
he's certainly not on a quest to look like an -list actress or pop star.
"olf's unger" describes a lamb dish, "d to make up five to 10 percent of anorexics but their numbers are on the rise.
hough mma started dieting on her own, the sites pushed her over the edge.
t started right after ept. 11 by eating healthier food, and the pounds came off.
"he whole belief that diagnoses are useful things rests on their ability to put together under one umbrella a relatively homogeneous set of syndromes, which gives the clinician the ability to shortcut a full assessment."
he gag reflex caused her teeth to clamp down as she yanked her hand out, biting into her fingers as she vomited.
he found one in rizona, but it cost thousands of dollars per week for a mandatory 60-day stay and would not accept her daughter without $25,000 up front.
er gnarled knuckles, marred with cracked skin, made manda eador's hands look more like those of a seasoned car mechanic than of a 17-year-old.
ry a softer tack, with phrases like "'m concerned about you."
" was somebody who did everything," says alker, who was valedictorian, prom queen and a three-sport athlete in high school.
he study  based on two weeks of programming in arch 2004 on taly's six main private and state-owned chanels  also confirmed that ads aimed at children encourge stereotyping.
he has written hundreds of letters, including one to first lady aura ush that led to ontaner's being appointed to the adolescent health committee for the exas epartment of ealth.
rapped in a world of food haters obsessed with body image, mma had explored the supportive eb sites and their chat rooms on her home computer.
oys noticed her more, and the leaner body paid off on the soccer field.
"hen  went to college to play basketball and that, along with (academics), became overwhelming."
oth echt and alker are medically underweight but, as part of ongoing therapy, prefer not to discuss numbers.
wo others were "for all intents and purposes about to ovulate," han said.
've been up, down, back, sideways, upside down.
he had passed out at band practice.
oved ones are typically tormented by the same questions: hould  say anything?
he'd rather be home with her "safe foods," including grilled chicken, hard-boiled eggs or tuna in water.
any people report that anger, sadness, boredom, anxiety or other negative emotions can trigger a binge episode.
manda eador, now manda arsh, is married, has two children, and lives in avannah, a. he's eating right and healthy, ontaner said, but the recovery process has been fraught with frustration, expensive therapy and a relapse after the children were born.
elevision shows such as "he wan" or "xtreme akeover" equate thinness and beauty with happiness.
ltimately, he speculated, it could lead to advances that would help infertile women.
"ow it is a matter of shedding an ingrained habit."
either too little nor too much," said ichbaum, who is keen, above all, to reassure her clientele.