It is the second case since March in which the disease, also known as bovine spongiform encephalopathy, or BSE, has been confirmed in a cow that died rather than having been slaughtered, the ministry said.
Chen Lu-hung, director of the health department's Bureau of Food Sanitation, noted that although there was only a single case of mad cow disease found in the United States, the actual situation in the United States has to be evaluated.
The health department suspended the import of beef and related products from the United States on Dec. 24, 2003, the same day that the United States announced it had discovered a case of mad cow disease.
A person who donated blood several times over the past 10 years has been diagnosed as the eighth case of the human form of mad cow disease in France since the invariably fatal illness was declared a public health risk in 1996, officials said.
In an interview in the Bulgarian newspaper Troud, the director of Bulgaria's laboratory for detecting mad cow, or bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), Raiko Pechev said the Dutch test was "more precise, more rapid" than tests already approved by the EU and "is in its last stage of EU pre-certification trials".
Beef sold in Bulgaria since June 2004 has not been certified free of mad cow disease because the test used is not officially recognised by the European Union, mad-cow expert Roumen Valchovski said Friday.
According to statistics released by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, testing for mad cow disease from June 1 to Oct. 17 on 85,812 cows came up negative, indicating that there is very little chance that American cows have mad cow disease, or bovine spongiform encephalopathy.
A human form of the disease, which can be fatal, is believed to come from eating beef products from cows struck with mad cow disease, especially tissue close to the animal's nervous system.
No cases of mad cow disease have been registered in Bulgaria, where beef meat began to be closely examined for the disease in 2001.
Department of Health officials said Friday that there is no timetable for reintroducing the importation of U.S. beef to Taiwan after America was declared an area affected by mad cow disease late last year.
The cow was born in Shikaoi, north Japan's Hokkaido region, in October 2000, and was checked for mad cow disease after it died, the ministry said.
Japan had insisted on testing all US beef imports as a condition for lifting the ban, which the US side has refused, but the difficulty in detecting the disease in younger cows led Japan to back down.
EU embargoes on British beef from animals aged over 30 months could be lifted from next year following a 95 percent fall in the number of cases of mad cow disease recorded in Britain over the past three and a half years, according to a European Commission report released Monday.
Ireland may have suffered its first homegrown case of the human form of mad cow disease after a man in his early 20s was hospitalized in Dublin for suspected variant Crutzfeld-Jakob Disease.
A 48-month-old cow that died recently has been confirmed as having had mad cow disease, making it the 14th case in Japan, the country's Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries Ministry said Thursday.
In the mid 1990s the British government announced a probable link between BSE and variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease (vCJD), the human form of mad cow disease, which can cause personality change, loss of body function, and eventually death.
Canada has been testing cattle for BSE since 1992, but boosted testing levels after a single case of mad cow disease was found in Alberta in May 2003.
The hospital said last month the young man had never received or made a blood donation and the cause of the infection was not linked to an operation.
"Beef and sheep meat has been tested but certificates were not issued due to the fact that the test used has not been officially recognised by the European Union.
Ireland banned the use of meat and bone meal as cattle feed, the suspected origin of mad cow disease, in 1990.
Kiril Kirov, director of the government's veterinary service, told the newspaper 168 hours that "the import and the usage of the Dutch test is a violation of EU requirements".
The fatal brain-wasting disease is believed to come from eating beef products from cows struck with mad cow disease.
Mad cow disease, or bovine spongiform encephalopathy, eats holes in the brains of cattle.
The person, was not identified publicly, was discovered to have variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease (vCJD), which causes personality change, loss of body function, brain deterioration and eventually death, officials from the health ministry said.
The first signs of mad cow disease emerged in Britain 10 years earlier, in 1986, but the government there denied there was any danger until the evidence became impossible to ignore.
Canada, whose exports of beef products are effected by a single case of mad cow disease since may 2003, has exceeded its mad cow testing target for 2004, the Canadian Food Inspection Agency reported Sunday.
The European Union head office said Friday it was allocating euro98.1 million (US$122 million) on testing cattle across the 25-nation bloc to prevent the spread of mad cow disease next year.
Medical tests on a young Irishman have confirmed that he is suffering from variant CJD, the human form of mad cow disease, a Dublin hospital spokesman said on Wednesday.
Under EU rules, all cattle for human consumption older than 30 months, all dead-on-farm cattle and emergency slaughtered cattle over 24 months have to be tested for bovine spongiform encephalopathy, or mad cow disease.
The human form of mad cow disease is called variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob.
"The use of a test, which has not been approved either in Holland or in any other EU country is a time-bomb", Roumen Petkov, director of the state's food veterinary control service told AFP.
Japan, the largest export market for US beef, is among about three dozen countries that halted US beef imports after mad cow disease was discovered there in December 2003.
Mad cow sprang up in Britain in 1986 and spread through Europe and Asia, prompting massive destruction of herds and devastating the European beef industry.
The Japan National Institution of Infectious Disease confirmed the infection after conducting detailed checks on samples from the cow, which tested positive Monday in an initial examination.
An EU ban on British beef and widespread cattle culls followed the 1996 alert, but by then the disease had spread to other countries.
As of October 27, more than 8,600 animals were tested for bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), the scientific name for mad cow, the agency said in a news release.
In late March, the United States applied to Taiwan's health department to have the ban lifted.
However, Chen said, if there is any doubt over the quality of the beef, the ban will not be lifted at that time.
In a letter dated Friday, medical Director Robert B. Smith III said laboratory tests came back positive but also "confirmed that this is not the disease commonly called 'mad cow disease.'"
The federal government is increasing the number of cattle tested to 30,000 in 2005 and subsequent years.
Since 1996, public health authorities have warned that people may catch vCJD from eating meat infected with mad cow disease, also known as bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), or from infected blood transfusions.
It appeared in Britain in 1986 and spread through Europe and Asia, prompting massive destruction of herds and devastating the European beef industry.
Japanese and US officials began talks Thursday on resuming US beef shipments to top export market Japan, banned last year over mad cow disease fears, amid signs of a resolution to the dispute.
The EU said the program was one of 82 programs tackling 10 major animal diseases, including rabies, mad cow, and scrapie, a similar brain-wasting disease found in sheep.
Emory University Hospital has confirmed that a brain surgery patient does not have the human version of mad cow disease, but does have a rare, fatal disorder that resembles it.
Ireland's health department confirmed that the man, who is in his early 20s, has never received or donated blood, and has lived all his life in Ireland.
Japan has screened every cow slaughtered for consumption after confirming mad cow, or bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), in its own herd in September 2001.
Only one person, a woman who had lived in Britain, was previously diagnosed with the disease in the Republic.
The target was 8,000 cattle tested by the end of 2004.
Cases have also been detected in the United States and Canada.
So far 147 people in Britain, and another 10 elsewhere, are known to have contracted vCJD since it was first identified in 1996 in Britain.
Apart from a blanket BSE test on all slaughtered cattle, local authorities in Japan in April began conducting checks on all cows aged 24 months or older that died of natural or unknown causes.
EU governments have made fighting animal diseases a top priority after the mad cow crisis and foot-and-mouth disease outbreaks over the last decade across Europe.
Smith said it is extremely unlikely other patients would have been exposed to the disease.
It is estimated the mad cow crisis has cost the Canadian beef industry and rural economies about 5 billion US dollars.
The 14th case in Japan was confirmed last week.
It warned that at least 500 other patients may have been exposed to the disease if they came into contact with surgical instruments used on the patient.
Chen also stressed that although a Taiwan "mad cow disease advisory committee" has suggested a conditional re-importation of American beef, Chen said it is necessary that a team be formed to check whether the new butchery measures are fully implemented.
The money would come from the euro188 million (US$235 million) set aside in 2005 to combat animal diseases in the EU.
The testing process is aimed at high-risk cattle that are showing signs of disease, such as aged or downer animals.
The United States and many other countries imposed bans on Canadian beef after the discovery.
The two-day talks, the fourth round since the ban was imposed in December, come after two Japanese ministries last week recommended exempting cows aged 20 months or younger from screening tests.
The government declined to identify the man or the hospital treating him.
Some 141 people are known to have died of vCJD in Britain.
In June 2004 the country switched to a Dutch test not yet recognised by the commission's veterinary control service.
Ireland's Food Safety Authority said that if the suspected Irish victim had contract the disease from contaminated meat, he probably would have done so more than a decade ago.
Since 2001 Bulgaria has been using one of five tests approved by the European Commission.
The hospital issued an alert more than a week ago saying preliminary tests on the unidentified patient produced a diagnosis of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease.
Cows aged 20 months or younger account for some 80 percent of Japan's total US beef imports, according to Japan's health ministry.
Tons of meat went to the market in violation of European norms", Valchovski, a virus expert and medical doctor, told AFP.
The vast bulk of them are elderly dairy cattle who would have eaten cattle-based feed in the 1980s.
Scientists say the disease has an incubation period of 10 years or more.
"Although we cannot guarantee your risk of an exposure is absolutely zero, it is immeasurably lower, for example, than other types of potential infections that sometimes occur in a hospital or other clinical surgical settings," he said.
EU Health and Consumer Affairs Commissioner David Byrne said the European Commission was boosting spending next year as a "commitment to supporting pro-active monitoring, preventative action and disease eradication.
The likely vector of contamination for livestock was brain and nerve tissue mixed in animal feed.
We are now awaiting the results of a police investigation of the case in order to find out who should be held responsible", deputy agriculture minister Boiko Boev told 168 hours.
But a positive diagnosis of vCJD often does not occur until the patient dies and can be autopsied.
"Healthy animals are the key to safe food," he said in a statement.
"Reaching this year's target ahead of schedule shows that Canada is taking its surveillance responsibilities seriously," Agriculture Minister Andy Mitchell said in the release.
All results came back negative for the disease.
The health scares rattled consumer confidence in meat products and how farm produce is controlled.
Agriculture Department inspectors continue to identify and destroy cattle infected with BSE, including 104 this year.
The European Commission helps co-fund the testing with national governments.
If everything is fine, U.S. beef can again be imported to Taiwan soon, perhaps sometime between late this year or early next year, Chen added.
Until now, only one Irish resident has died from vCJD: a young mother who spent most of her life in England.
In addition, the U.S. government has adopted stricter slaughtering techniques to prevent possible infection, Chen added.
It icope with this difficult situation," she said.
"Nobody can keep their eyes shut anymore about such a serious problem.