ccording to a recent city survey, more than 40 percent of the teenagers suffer from anemia caused by malnutrition and about 20 percent of middle school students are overweight, "hina aily" reports today.
he study shows that the 12 percent obesity is close to the standard in developed countries.
hey also found that the higher education levels people have, the less they are likely to suffer from obesity, especially among women.
   survey in hanghai has revealed that one in eight people in the city suffer from overweight.
bout 11 percent of national men and 14 percent of women had diabetes and the rate is expected to rise in the following years, according to the study released by 's medical center today.
ypnotism has become the most successful treatment of people suffering from psychological illness like fear, anxiety, and it has been used on people suffering from obesity and even on drug addicts, he said.
ccording to his study, 42 percent of uwaiti women and 28 percent of men are obese.
he research showed that the ratio of adults suffering from obesity has reached 12.6 percent, and that of youngsters is 11.35 percent.
  ore than 40 percent of uwaiti women are obese and suffer from other chronic ailments such as vein-hardening, diabetes and hypertension, local press reported today, citing a uwaiti psychologist.
  ore than half of the 710,000 uwaiti citizens are suffering from obesity and anemia because of poor eating habits and other causes, according to studies by a leading local nutritionist.
bout 70 million hinese people, mostly city dwellers, are obese, and the number is on the rise as people's living standards have greatly improved in recent years.
eople in the 7-12 and 60-70 age groups run a greater risk of becoming overweight, and incidence of obesity in males is higher than in females, the survey showed.
 recent survey found that 12.6 percent of 4,895 adults and 11.35 percent of 9,093 children who live in urban hanghai are obese, and these figures are close to the average weight proportion seen in developed countries, it was reported in today's "en ui ao aily."
he ratio of female to male in uwaiti population is 51:49.
ncrease in family income causes a change in the dietary patterns that mainly are represented by an increase in consumption of soft drinks, tea, chocolates, sweets, nuts and ready-made foods.
he ritish government set targets on obesity because it increases the likelihood of coronary heart disease, strokes and illnesses including diabetes.
l-wadi's another survey conducted among 1,154 obese patients revealed that nearly one quarter of them had hypertension and about 33 percent suffered diabetes.
he government wants only 8 percent of women and 6 percent of men, aged 16 to 64, to be overweight by 2005: the same proportion as in 1980.
   survey showed that ong ong children were eating too much junk food, local press reports revealed today.
he number of people coming to clinics for this particular treatment is on the rise."
wenty-eight percent of uwaiti men are overweight.
e said up to 700 obese people were satisfied with the results of hypnotherapy.
  ne out of every ten people in hanghai is overweight, mostly because of improved lifestyles and poor eating habits.
ver 12 percent said they did not eat breakfast, and close to 30 percent were unsatisfied with their weight.
ducational background was also related to the incidence rate, which is lower in well-educated people, especially in females.
esearchers found that children aged from seven to 12, and people between aged 60 and 70, are easiest to fall victim to obesity.
he study, involving 2,000  nationals aged between 30 and 80 years, found diabetes in the  to be particularly widespread among the elderly and less educated social groups.
ifteen percent of female adults suffer from obesity, while the level among male adults 10.68 percent.
he study attributed the reason to the increasing incidence of obesity among  nationals, which is strongly linked to diabetes.
  eavy-drinking women, school children who smoke and the overweight of both sexes are ruining ritain's drive to create a healthy nation.
xperts warn people who are overweight have increased tendencies toward cardiovascular and cerebral disease, diabetes, and kidney and liver disease.
eople in uwait are usually kept away from outdoor physical exercises by the hot desert climate which lasts at least for eight months a year, and diet with much fat are their favorates.
owever, the ealth epartment is refusing to consider a ban on cigarette and alcohol advertising, saying it is up to the public to change lifestyles, following government health education.
ice, the main antonese food, contains much less nutrition than that found in corn, wheat, potatoes and many other staples popular in north hina.
any spoiled teenagers from one-child families eat only a particular kind of food, such as meat or sweets, which might easily lead them to develop obesity, diabetes or heart disease.
ore than half the respondents spent up to five  dollars (0.64  dollars) a day on junk food, and another 26 percent spent between six to ten  dollars (0.77 to 1.28  dollars).
he  considers insulin an essential drug.
iabetes is a chronic disease caused by the human body's failure to produce insulin or to produce effective insulin.
ut despite the implementation of the strategy, ohn ourn, the comptroller and auditor general, reported that ritons' behavior is becoming worse in three areas: obesity in men and women, drinking by women and smoking by the young.
he deficiency leads to increased concentrations of glucose in blood and thus damage the body's many systems, particularly blood vessels and nerves.
he ational udit ffice today reported limited progress in achieving the aims of the ealth of the ation hite aper of l992.
he said the intake of vitamin  rich foods such as fruit juices are very low, particularly among pre-school children.
he survey was conducted jointly by the iangshan ospital of raditional hinese edicine and the utrition and ood esearch ection of the hanghai edical cience niversity.
t was conducted by hanghai edical ciences niversity and hanghai iangshan raditional hinese edicine ospital.
ealthy targets were set to be reached by dates between 1994 and 2005.
besity is number one health threat associated with nutrition in uwait, irector of ood and utrition epartment of the inistry of health awzia l-wadi said in a recent study.
everal factors contribute to the higher prevalence of obesity in adult women, l-wadi said.
l-ousawi said: " therefore advise women suffering from such diseases to take some exercises such as walking and to follow the right diet."
o far it is the third rab country that has been using this method after gypt and ebanon which have been applying the treatment.
  ypnotism has become a successful experiment to rid extra fat in obese men and women in uwait, a specialist said here today.
uwait has started this medical experiment on obesity cases recently.
azen bul, a social worker in close contact with the experiment in the country, told uwait ews gency that "hypnotherapy of obesity has made an unprecedented success in uwait.
uwaiti women accounted for 50.4 percent of the country's population, which is 708,000.
owever, more boys suffer from obesity than girls.
he nutritionist also said a large percentage of uwaiti children are suffering from malnutrition due to bad feeding habits that cause iron deficiency anemia.
he ratio of boys is 14.7 percent, almost double that of girls.
   massive increase in the incidence of diabetes has been forecast for the nited rab mirates () nationals unless education and preventive measures are taken, a medical study said.
"egular food consumption between meals, the use of sugar in tea, and the consumption of an additional meal at iwaniya (men's leisure time in chatting gathering) contributed significantly to the development of obesity among this group," she explained.
actors affecting the eating habits in uwait are income, food prices, food import policies and the drastic change in food formula, she reiterated.
edical experts suggested that citizens, especially people suffering from obesity, should follow advice to change their life styles and diets.
e also cited links between psychological problems such as fear and anxiety with obesity, adding that psychological pressure could drive some people into ingesting large quantities of food that lead to obesity.
uwait has a large percentage of obesity cases among its 700,000 citizens, especially women, because of less activities and unrational food structure.
  rmed with new surveys showing high rates of childhood anemia, obesity, and short stature, nutritionists in uangzhou are pushing for more attention to local children's diets both at home and school.
  he number of diabetics worldwide will increase from the current about 120 million to top 250 million by the year 2025, the orld ealth rganization () reported today.
n uangzhou, about 70 percent of the teenagers either have the school lunch or buy lunch on the street nearby.
he survey says that uangzhou teenagers, shorter than the average national height of the same age group, are about 10 to 15 centimeters shorter than apanese teens.
lcohol targets were set because too much drink raises the blood pressure, increasing the risk of stroke, and is blamed for liver cirrhosis, cancers and road traffic accidents.
hong ukun, a nutrition expert of the uangzhou cience and echnology ssociation, blamed unbalanced and dull food eaten every day for the malnutrition-based health problems.
ohammed l-ousawi, irector of the ducational esearch enter in uwait, called on the people to follow a scientific diet to reduce opportunities of contracting the diseases, nglish daily rab imes said..
l-wadi noted that "it has been shown that obesity shortens life which is mainly due to cardiovascular and cerebro-vascular diseases, constituting an additional risk to overweight patients."
ead of the center, illiam g an-sui, said concern over an increasing number of young children with obesity problems had prompted him to research the eating habits of upper-grade students at all seven primary schools in hai an, a district in the east of ong ong island.
bul said there was no side effects arising from this method, adding that even international-recognized psychiatrics applies this therapy in many cases like anxiety and depression.
ut instead figures since then have risen to 16 percent of women and 13 percent of men.
he number of sessions patients need in hypnotism treatment depends on how complex the case is, and easier cases take only several weeks to get satisfied curative results, according to the specialist.
any of them gained unwanted pounds because they do not engage in regular exercise, sleep too much and eat food that is high in fat and calories, another survey of eijing's overweight people showed.
e warned that obesity would directly lead to depression which is also a common disease in uwait.
he survey was carried out among nearly 14,000 people, including 4,895 adults and over 9,093 young people from nine districts in the city.
he survey indicated that differences in age, gender, and education levels can influence the ratio of obesity.
ccording to the .. health agency, about 20 percent of diabetics develop the so-called insulin-dependent form of diabetes, or , and live on with insulin injections, while about 30 percent of the non- cases may use insulin injections to control their conditions.
he ambitious strategy to reduce coronary heart disease, strokes, cancer, mental illness, sexually transmitted diseases and accidents was introduced by irginia ottomley when she was health secretary.
he long-term complications of diabetes include blindness, kidney failure, heart attacks and even gangrene and amputation of the limbs.
nd most school cafeterias don't serve food containing the seven basic nutrients students need every day, according to hong.
nly 11 of the 27 targets set by the epartment of ealth to reduce premature death and avoidable sickness by promoting sensible lifestyles look certain to be reached, according to an official report.
he poll of 2,760 students' eating habits by the hai an aritas hildren and outh enter found crisps, sweets, chocolates, chips, chicken and other deep-fried food, ice-cream and ice-lollies topped the list of favorite foods.
he expert said riday that a sedentary life style was the primary cause of such diseases.
ost of the snacks were bought from their school tuck shops, the survey showed.
hese factors include repeated pregnancies, rapid decline in breast feeding, an early introduction to bottle feeding as well as poor eating habits.
octors said common sense should be applied and they suggested nationals to eat more fruits, cereals and vegetables which were cited as the best sources to avoid diabetes.
he  has a 2.4 million population, but about two third of them are foreigners.
e urged schools to educate students about nutrition and a balanced diet.
 vial of insulin may cost a month's salary in many frican countries, according to it.
owever, it noted that in some developing countries, the drug that turns the once fatal  into a treatable disease is still unavailable or unaffordable.
he growth will be registered in both developed and, especially, developing countries, due to population aging, unhealthy diets, obesity and a secondary lifestyle.
he revealed that police and army personnel were more susceptible to becoming overweight (34.4 percent) while obesity was most prevalent among males with a technical profession.
eams from the ational ealth ervice formulated "action plans" to improve education, screening and preventive techniques.