he 20 hostages, including foreign tourists and local resort workers, were abducted late unday from alaysia's ipadan sland by six heavily armed men and taken on two fishing boats toward the hilippines, officials said.
   total of 20 people were taken hostage by six heavily armed men unday night from ipadan island off abah, ast alaysia, but their motives behind the abduction are yet to be confirmed, alaysian olice said onday.
ix gunmen stormed the ipadan sland esort off the eastern alaysian state of abah late unday, taking 20 people, including 10 foreign tourists, hostage on two boats.
  bout 20 people, including foreign tourists, were taken hostage by armed pirates on ipadan island off the abah coast, ast alaysia, unday night, according to police sources onday.
ost of the hostages are foreign tourists, police said.
he others are eight alaysians and two ilipino workers, he said, adding that the names of the hostages would be released by the alaysian police.
he tourists were reportedly taken hostage late unday on a remote resort island of ipadan off the abah coast, eastern alaysia.
he hostages were said to have been taken onto a boat and are now at sea.
  outh frican epartment of oreign ffairs on onday confirmed that two outh fricans are among the 21 people taken hostage by gunmen in alaysia's famed diving island of ipadan.
  uslim rebels who have been holding 27 ilipinos hostage at a remote mountain stronghold in the hilippines claimed responsibility uesday for also abducting about 20 people from a nearby alaysian tourist island.
  alaysian oreign inister yed amid lbar said onday that all the 20 people taken hostage by armed pirates unday night are safe.
e said the authorities are determined to secure the release of the foreign tourists and local residents held hostage.
alaysian efense inister ajib un azak said onday that an air-and-sea search team had determined where the hostages  half of whom were foreign tourists  were being held, following their abduction on the lush ipadan sland in eastern alaysia.
yewitnesses said the hostages were forced to swim to the boats.
uno said the hostages were reportedly taken by boats heading toward hilippine waters early onday morning.
eanwhile, alaysian oreign inister yed amid lbar also held a news conference earlier onday on the incident, saying that all the 20 people taken hostage by armed pirates were safe.
  ix masked assailants have taken more than 20 people, including mericans and uropeans, hostage on a remote resort island in eastern alaysia, police said onday.
s that assault progressed, about 20 people, including foreign tourists, were abducted unday night by heavily armed attackers on a nearby alaysian island and taken by boat toward the hilippines.
onfirming the news in uala umpur onday afternoon, eputy rime inister bdullah hmad adawi said a special team has been set by the police to rescue the hostages who were taken in boats by the pirates.
he abductors surprised and captured the group on a beach on ipadan sland late unday, and two foreign tourists managed to escape the men, emporna police chief ulaiman unaidi told he ssociated ress by telephone.
  escue teams were searching outheast sian seas on uesday for assailants who abducted 20 hostages from a alaysian diving resort  an attack that hilippine uslim rebels claimed they carried out.
 police intelligence report said the hostages were taken to the province of ulu at the southern tip of the hilippines, no more than an hour's boat ride from ipadan.
he other tourists taken hostage are believed to be from ermany, rance and the nited tates.
he kidnapping might be tied to uslim rebels in the hilippines who are seeking the release of militants jailed in the nited tates, although some authorities said the bu ayyaf rebels were just trying to attract attention.
ccording to orian, an merican couple, both aged 51, who were captured together with the 20 people, managed to escape before they were forced into a boat.
he other missions could not be contacted but they would be informed later, he said.
hey were taken unday night from lush ipadan sland off the northern orneo state of abah.
e did not rule out the possibility that the kidnapping was connected to the bu ayyaf rebel group which was holding several hostages in southern hilippines.
he bu ayyaf is the smaller but more radical of two uslim groups fighting for an independent state in the hilippines.
ut uno, who is also the presidential spokesman, said initial reports from the hilippine ational olice could not confirm if the pirates were ilipinos.
alaysian officials said today that the kidnappers were believed to be outside alaysian waters.
he gunmen, believed to be ilipinos, apparently surprised the tourists on a beach on ipadan sland on unday night.
arlier, eputy rime inister and ome inister bdullah hmad adawi said a special team has been set up by the police to rescue the hostages who were taken in boats by the pirates.
 waitress from the hilippines who escaped the abduction added weight to the uslim rebels' claim that they were involved.
"e know who they are and we are still trying to get hold of their families before we release their names," he added.
olice are currently trying to trace the boat, he said.
he hostages forced onto the fishing boats included two rench tourists, three ermans, two outh fricans, two inns and one ebanese, as well as a ilipino worker and nine alaysians, authorities said.
yed amid said the names of the hostages would be released by the alaysian police.
sman brahim, a police spokesman in the alaysian capital, uala umpur, confirmed that the two who escaped were mericans and that they were still in abah.
''e really need to talk to our children,'' ary urphy told he ssociated ress at alaysia's international airport.
  ames and ary urphy were just another merican couple escaping on a dream vacation to a lush alaysian resort island.
he urphys escaped by refusing to get on the boats, according to police in emporna.
hey said ary urphy couldn't swim and when the kidnappers tried to force her, her husband said they'd have to shoot him if they forced her into the water.
he gunmen then forced their hostages to swim to two fishing boats, which sped away and appeared to be heading toward hilippine waters.
t was however confirmed that among the hostages, there are 11 foreigners  three ermans, two outh fricans, two rench nationals, two inns, one ebanese and one ilipino while the rest nine are alaysians comprising four workers of the ildlife epartment, three workers of the ipadan resort center, a policeman and a staff of yarikat orneo ivers.
e said the hostage incident is an "isolated" case and it is safe for people to visit ipadan island, a popular resort especially among scuba-divers.
  hilippine resident oseph strada onday ordered the hilippine military forces to go after the six armed pirates who reportedly kidnapped some 20 people, mostly foreigners, in eastern alaysia, a senior hilippine official said.
ipadan, popular for diving, is an island off the northeast coast of abah, the alaysian side of orneo island, which is shared with ndonesia.
he government has refused several rebel demands, including the release of three rab terrorists held in jails in the nited tates.
he urphys, who have been living in ustralia the past two years, arrived in the alaysian capital, uala umpur, on onday evening but said they didn't want to talk to the media extensively until the hostages are released.
'' don't want to do anything that would endanger their lives,'' ames urphy told he ssociated ress at the airport.
e said most of the hostages were uropeans and mericans.
n merican couple escaped the unday evening attack in alaysia by refusing to swim out to the kidnappers' boats and then hiding overnight in nearby bushes.
he hostages include two rench nationals, three ermans, two outh fricans, two inns and one ebanese, all tourists, he told a news conference here.
he attackers then forced their hostages to swim a distance to two fishing boats, which then sped away and appeared to be heading into hilippine waters, officials said.
ose alimlim, chief of intelligence for the hilippine military, said an air force plane and navy boats were searching hilippine waters near alaysia for the hostages captured unday.
ulaiman said the assailants were believed to be ilipinos.
fficials were searching today for the hostages  half of whom are foreign tourists.
he hostages forced onto the fishing boats included tourists  two rench, three ermans, two outh fricans, two inns and one ebanese  and nine alaysians who either worked at the resort or for the wildlife service.
e said the incident was an "isolated" case and it was safe for people to visit ipadan island, a resort popular with scuba-divers.
uslim rebels in the hilippines who are seeking the release of militants jailed in the orld rade enter bombing case claimed responsibility uesday for the alaysian kidnapping.
uslim rebels in the hilippines who are seeking the release of militants jailed in the orld rade enter bombing case claimed responsibility uesday for the alaysian kidnapping.
rior to the rebel announcement, ol. rnesto de uzman, chief of staff of the hilippine military's outhern ommand, said officials were trying to determine whether there was a connection with the hostage situation on the southern hilippine island of asilan, about 275 miles northeast of emporna, the port from which tourists take boats for ipadan.
n the island province of asilan, troops shelled bu ayyaf camps again today as soldiers battled their way up a mountain where the rebels were holding 27 ilipinos captive.
n asilan, hilippines, hilippine troops shelled rebel camps again uesday as soldiers battled their way up a mountain where bu ayyaf rebels were holding 27 ilipinos captive.
he rebels, who are fighting for an independent slamic state in the predominantly atholic hilippines, are demanding the release of uslim militants jailed in the nited tates, including the mastermind of the 1993 orld rade enter bombing.
eanwhile, at the airport in uala umpur, ary urphy was close to tears.
wo of the captives  ames and ary urphy, both 51, of ochester, ..  managed to escape.
e will verify and confirm this,'' he told he ssociated ress.
e will verify and confirm this,'' he told he ssociated ress.
yewitnesses said two of the captives  ames and ary urphy, both 51, of ochester, ..  escaped after ames urphy told the assailants his wife didn't know how to swim.
''e really want to get to the phone.''
''e really want to get to the phone.''
iting the alaysian police report, uno said 10 of those kidnapped were foreign tourists, which include rench, erman, outh frican, ebanese and innish nationals.
"hey are getting help from neighboring countries to trace the hostages," he said.
hong said the area was considered one of the top 10 diving spots in the world and that six resorts on the island cater mostly to professional divers.
hong ah iat, the minister of tourism and environment for abah, said the island was near two alaysian naval bases on the eastern coast of abah.
e said police had not made any contact with the kidnappers.
olice there said the kidnappers in alaysia spoke ausug, a language spoken in parts of the southern hilippines, but not in asilan, where the bu ayyaf rebels operate.
''ur group is behind the abduction of the foreigners (in alaysia) and there are still a lot of surprises for the government if they won't listen to us,'' bu hmad, spokesman for the hilippine rebel group bu ayyaf, said in an interview over local radio station .
 local marine photographer said one of the attackers identified himself as a police officer and told him to give up his watch and cellular phone.
t has been blamed for numerous attacks on hristians.
he assault, which began aturday, has been slowed by heavy vegetation and by land mines, which have forced the troops to employ metal detectors, officials said.
''t first  thought he was joking ... but when  refused to obey his orders, he held a gun to my head,'' anny hin was quoted as saying by the national news agency ernama.
afir akaran, a state abinet minister at police headquarters in emporna, told he ssociated ress uesday that marine police and navy reinforcements have been brought in.
'' don't want to do anything that would endanger their lives,'' he said.
''e don't want our comments to overshadow anything that's going on with the situation,'' he said.
urphy said that he would speak more extensively once he knew that the other hostages were released and safe.
yewitnesses said ary urphy didn't know how to swim, and her husband told the assailants they'd have to shoot him if they forced her into the water.
bdullah said alaysia's security forces are in hot pursuit of the pirates, who were reportedly armed with rocket launchers and 16 rifles.
  uthorities hunted the seas between alaysia and the hilippines today for two fishing boats controlled by heavily armed men holding 21 hostages they abducted from a alaysian diving resort two days earlier.
ipadan island is a popular resort especially for scuba-divers.
ipadan is a world-renowned diving island off the northeast coast of abah, the alaysian side of orneo sland, which is shared with ndonesia.
he 27 ilipino hostages  who include many schoolchildren  are believed to be held at the main rebel stronghold further up the mountain, which illanueva said his forces were avoiding shelling to prevent injuries to the captives.
 rebel spokesman said two hostages, including a child, were injured in the shelling of the rebel camp, but the claim could not be independently verified.
hilippine efense ecretary rlando ercado said the military is still determining whether the bu ayyaf is actually responsible for the alaysian abductions.
hilippine efense ecretary rlando ercado said the military is still determining whether the bu ayyaf, which is fighting for an independent slamic state in the predominantly atholic hilippines, is actually responsible for the alaysian abductions.
hilippine officials, however, expressed skepticism over the claim by the extremist bu ayyaf rebels.
n the alaysian capital, uala umpur, ames urphy declined today to talk extensively about his ordeal.
he department's spokesman onnie amoepa told outh frican ress ssociation that the identity of the man and the woman have been known to the outh frican mission in alaysia.
hen the kidnappers turned around, the merican couple ran into the bushes and hid until dawn.
eputy rime inister and ome inister bdullah hmad adawi said earlier onday alaysian security forces are in hot pursuit of the kidnappers.
''e don't get this kind of thing happening in alaysia very often,'' ahathir said.
orian said the armed men raided the police base on the island before capturing the hostages.
alaysia is very safe for tourists.''
e said alaysian police are in contact with their counterparts in outhern hilippines in efforts to track down the pirates.
"he government is doing everything in its power to secure the release of these two people," he said.
''e don't just jump and believe the bu ayyaf immediately.
''e don't just jump and believe the bu ayyaf immediately.
" think the authorities are taking the necessary steps to get them (hostages) released from their captors," yed amid said.
ne was a ilipino resort employee and the nationality of the 21st hostage wasn't immediately released.
t least 10 bu ayyaf rebels and four soldiers have died in the fighting in the hinterlands of the southern island province of asilan.
''ur group is behind the abduction of the foreigners (in alaysia) and there are still a lot of surprises for the government if they won't listen to us,'' bu ayyaf spokesman bu hmad said in an interview over local radio station .
y the time they arrived at the uala umpur nternational irport late onday, they were among the few escapees of a mass abduction by mysterious gunmen 24 hours earlier which left 20 hostages still missing in outheast sian waters.
''e really need to talk to our children,'' she told the .
''t will affect tourism in abah, but the rest of the country is not affected by this.
''his is a part of their propaganda because they are really trying to attract attention, especially international attention,'' he said.
 special team has been set up by the alaysian police to rescue the hostages and the alaysian police are in contact with their counterparts in outhern hilippines in efforts to track down the kidnappers.
hen the hostage-takers turned around, the urphys ran into the bushes and hid until dawn, eyewitnesses said.
heir other boat was left behind," he said.
ccording the report, five staff members of the ipadan resort, and a ilipino, a alaysian policeman and four staffers of the alaysian wildlife department, were also among the abducted.
he minister said that his ministry had informed two foreign missions here whose nationals are involved.
he minister could not say if the pirates have made any demands.
e said access to the island was restricted to 80 divers at one time, and 40 staff at the six resorts, to protect the coral reef and wildlife.
nother hostage situation was escalating in a remote area of the southern hilippines, about 275 miles north of emporna, the port from which tourists take boats for ipadan.
uspected bu ayyaf rebels attacked an army outpost in olo in nearby ulu province late unday, injuring seven soldiers and five civilians, ulu police chief andido asimiro said.
e doubted the bu ayyaf claim of credit.
he claim came as troops battled their way up the densely forested mountain in the hilippines where the uslim extremists were holding their captives.
he rebels have demanded the freedom of rab terrorist suspects in .. jails, including amzi ousef, mastermind of the 1993 bombing of the orld rade enter in ew ork.
he rebels have demanded the freedom of three rab terrorist suspects in .. jails, including amzi ousef, mastermind of the 1993 bombing of the orld rade enter in ew ork, and heik mar bdel-ahman, accused of conspiring to blow up ew ork ity landmarks.
''ur group is behind the abduction of the foreigners (in alaysia) and there are still a lot of surprises for the government if they won't listen to us,'' bu ayyaf spokesman bu hmad told hilippine radio station .
he urphys have been living in ydney for the past two years.
er husband, an executive for astman odak o. in ydney, ustralia, said they had not slept since unday night but were otherwise fine.
he kidnappers apparently let them go, and the merican couple ran into the bushes and hid until dawn.
''e're tracking them down,'' he added.
bout half of the hostages have since been freed.
escue teams searching southeast sian seas say they've zeroed on assailants  an attack that the hilippine rebel group bu ayyaf on uesday claimed it carried out.
e have soldiers who are riding on patrol boats, working with the hilippine navy.''
sked if they had hidden in the bushes, urphy said, ''e did that.''
ut there were no early indications that the assailants were involved in the territorial dispute.
ut there were no indications that the hostage-takers were involved in the territorial dispute.
e added that resident strada had given the instructions to the hilippine avy and the hilippine ir orce in support of the border patrol agreement between the hilippines and alaysia.
''his has never happened here before, so  don't think there are any alaysians involved,'' in the hostage taking, hong said.
he hostage takers have made no demand so far.
ive people were being questioned in connection with the abduction, abah chief of police amat alib said.
hilippine officials initially said they were investigating possible links to the bu ayyaf.
he argument over the islands dates back to 1969, when ndonesia and alaysia failed to reach agreement during technical discussions about the overlapping continental shelf that borders the neighboring countries.
n retaliation for the abduction, a group of vigilantes seized 11 relatives of bu ayyaf leader hadaffy anjalani.
he group has demanded freedom for orld rade enter bomber amzi ousef, and heik mar bdel-ahman, accused of conspiring to blow up ew ork ity landmarks.
ut emporna police chief ulaiman unaidi said uesday that authorities had yet to pinpoint the abductor's hideout.
urphy, an executive for astman odak o. in ydney, said they had not slept since the previous night but were otherwise fine.
ince 1969, alaysia and ndonesia have both claimed sovereignty over ipadan and igitan, another elebes ea island.
cores of reporters waited for them to arrive, but no alaysian authorities or .. embassy officials were there to escort them from their plane after their long ordeal.
he attack on ipadan began unday when six masked gunmen, carrying -47s and a rocket launcher, grabbed tourists and workers and confiscated their cash and jewelry.
olice said some of those arrested were former employees of the ipadan resort and were tied to the ilipino fishing community along abah's eastern coastline.
e said no demands had been announced.
"here is a border patrol agreement between the hilippines and alaysia which has been activated and so elements of both countries are in operation in that area," uno said.
e said the ground troops were pursuing fleeing rebels, and the troops next plan to advance to the main stronghold further up the mountain, he said.
elicopter gunships pounded three outlying bu ayyaf camps with rockets again uesday, said t. en. iomedio illanueva, chief of the military's outhern ommand.
''he's got lots of bites from sleeping in the bushes, a lot of sand fleas,'' he said, pointing to ary urphy's legs, which were covered with a rash of insect bites.
s cameras flashed around them, ary urphy, wearing plaid ermuda shorts, said all she wanted was ''a good night's sleep and a hot shower.''
he urphys, both 51, of ochester, .., appeared shaken up and very much alone.
n a press briefing, ress ecretary icardo uno said the hilippine embassy in uala umpur has received a note from the assistant director of the alaysian olice informing the hilippines of the kidnapping.
he outheast sian neighbors have both filed claims with the nternational ourt of ustice at he ague, etherlands.
hey had not yet informed their three children living in oston, ochester and ustralia about their trauma.
''his is a hostage situation and we're considering the safety of the hostages to give them the best chance to survive,'' illanueva said.
hey still held nine relatives after freeing anjalani's pregnant wife and a daughter.
hen asked if this was an accurate account, the urphys smiled but would not elaborate.
"reeing them is uppermost," he added.
hin said he hid in the woods while the kidnappers ransacked the resort.
escribing the incident as unexpected, bdullah said it should prompt the police to review the security of territorial waters off abah.
hile police could not yet confirm the captors' motives, politics, ransom and feelings of dissatisfaction were among the possible reasons, alaysian olice nspector-eneral orian ai told a news conference here at the federal police headquarters.
hey fled into the jungles and emerged onday morning, and their condition was good and they were not injured, he said.
he abah economy relies heavily on the 400,000 people who visit its beach resorts and rain forests every year.
eneth agaanan said when one of the men grabbed her, she replied to him in uluk  the language prevalent in the southern hilippines  and that he understood her.
he rebels originally seized more than 50 hostages, including many children, from two schools in asilan on arch 20 for use as human shields after attacking another army outpost.
alaysia and ndonesia both claim sovereignty over the elebes ea islands.
s cameras flashed around them, ary urphy said all she wanted now was ''a good night's sleep and a hot shower.''
ary urphy, wearing plaid ermuda shorts, was close to tears.
''e haven't slept yet, but yes, we are fine.''
rime inister ahathir ohamad insisted alaysia was still a safe tourist destination.
he rebels have warned they will behead their five remaining adult male hostages  including a priest  if the military does not halt its assault.
hat may be of little comfort to ee ui hia, a guide at ipadan ive enter who sat today in his empty office in emporna.
"e seriously feel that politics may be a reason," he said.
he group also announced last week that it had beheaded two male teachers.
hong ah iat, tourism minister for abah, said he was concerned that the attack would scare off the 400,000 tourists who visit abah beaches and rain forests every year.
everal hours later, however, hmad said he would neither confirm nor deny his group was involved.
he attack began when six masked gunmen, carrying -47s and a rocket launcher and speaking a hilippine language, grabbed tourists and workers and confiscated their cash and jewelry, orian said.
he demands were rejected by the hilippine government and by the .. mbassy.
he .. tate epartment has included the bu ayyaf in a list of 28 foreign groups that threaten mericans at home or abroad.
hilippine officials, who were helping coordinate the rescue attempt, quickly expressed skepticism over the statement.
ut hilippine officials quickly expressed skepticism over the statement.
''he's got lots of bites from sleeping in the bushes, a lot of sand fleas,'' he said, pointing to his wife's legs, which were covered with a rash of insect bites.
''nd what's more important, it will affect our business.''
he hostages have been forced to stay in unprotected shacks while the rebels have taken refuge in bunkers, a hostage told - television in an interview by cellular telephone.
agaanan also said one of the assailants wore a vest emblazoned with the initials of the oro ational iberation ront, the hilippines' largest uslim rebel group before it signed a peace accord in 1996.
ut t. dgar oseph ndres, a navy pilot, said he found nothing in a three-hour search of the sparsely inhabited area today.
omoepa said the mission is involved in discussions with nterpol.
"hey came in two 'jongkong' boats, and when fleeing with the hostages they used only one jongkong boat and seized a boat belonging to the resort center.