  ndonesian ttorney eneral oedjono . tmonegoro said here onday that an investigation on the wealth of former government officials, including former resident oeharto and his family, was going on.
ttorney eneral oedjono . tmonegoro said last week that the government has started an investigation into the wealth of former government officials, including former resident oeharto and his family.
  ndonesian ttorney eneral ndi . halib onday said he would ask former resident oeharto to sign a letter of authorization that would enable the investigation team to probe oeharto's overseas wealth.
t said it would be more relevant if the call for the probe into the riches of the former president and his family was made part of the decree on corruption, collusion and nepotism.
  he office of ndonesia's attorney general has formed a team to investigate the wealth of present and former ndonesian government officials, a spokesman of the office said here uesday.
tudents and citizens in the country have held various demonstrations recently, urging the government to bring oeharto to court on the charges of corruption, collusion and nepotism during his 32-year rule.
he ndonesian government has set up two teams to investigate alleged corruption by oeharto as well as his wealth.
he decree on clean governance included a stipulation that the government investigate oeharto's wealth.
onjallaz denied that the investigation into oeharto's wealth was on the agenda during his meeting with the attorney general.
oedjono said that he has assigned junior ttorney eneral to carry out the investigation.
he offices of the attorney general, chief public prosecutor and public prosecutor have asked the public to provide information about the wealth of officials to help the team in its investigations, the spokesman said.
  ndonesian ttorney eneral ndi uhammad halib pledged to hunt state assets which were allegedly stashed overseas during the 32-year rule of former president oeharto, the akarta ost reported aturday.
ndonesian oreign ffairs inister li latas said earlier this week that his ministry was ready to assist the ttorney eneral's ffice in rescuing state assets possibly stashed abroad during the oeharto era.
e said the team will be led by the junior attorney general for civil and state administrative courts.
ocal and foreign reports have accused oeharto of amassing wealth illegally during his 32-year reign and stashing the fortune overseas.
rticle four of the decree states that efforts to eradicate corruption, collusion and nepotism must be made indiscriminately upon any state officials, former state officials, their families and cronies as well as private businessmen, business tycoons and former president oeharto.
owever, a foreign media once estimated oeharto's and his family's fortune is worth 40 billion .. dollars.
his is the first time that demonstrators stage their action near the residence of oeharto who resigned on ay 21 amid anti-government demonstrations and bloody rioting in the country.
abibie has promised to carry out the reforms and to be free from corruption, collusion and nepotism.
he nited evelopment arty faction earlier asked for a separate decree to contain investigation into oeharto, officials, former officials and their families.
  he ndonesian ational and gency's ambi office has uncovered evidence of former resident oeharto's allegedly ill-gotten wealth in entral umatra rovince alone, he akarta ost reported ednesday.
  n an apparent response to mounting demands from students and opposition groups, ndonesian legislators on riday agreed to launch an investigation into former president oeharto's wealth.
fter an uncertain response to wide calls for a thorough investigation into the wealth of oeharto, his family and friends, the dominant olkar (unctional roup) faction has finally changed its position, saying that it strongly supports the wealth probe.
e said the special team tasked to investigate the former president has already scheduled a meeting with oeharto.
he government prosecutor's office would continue a thorough investigation into the wealth while the land would be seized for the state or returned to its original owners, asan said.
ut they failed to reach the target point because of tight security precautions at various intersections that lead to the spot, official ntara ews gency reported.
merican magazine orbes estimated in uly that oeharto, who stepped down amid mounting public pressure on ay 21, had a fortune worth 4 billion .. dollars.
oeharto, who had ruled ndonesia for the last 32 years, resigned on ay 21 under the heavy pressure from the people demanding for total reforms in political, economic and legal fields.
his is the first time olkar officially declared war against corruption, collusion and nepotism.
ll five factions of the eople's onsultative ssembly (), the country's highest legislative body, agreed to add a provision in a decree on clean governance, preventing centralization of power, corruption, collusion and nepotism.
"e will consult with the oreign inistry to rescue the state assets stashed overseas," halib told reporters after meeting wiss mbassador to ndonesia erard onjallaz at his office riday.
 investigation team set up in eptember announced on uesday that some evidence of oeharto's allegedly ill-gotten wealth has been found in several provinces including land, factories and others.
eanwhile, a legislator claimed that resident . abibie needed no new law to start investigation on former president oeharto, saying that the existing anti-corruption law would do.
"he government is serious in investigating oeharto's personal fortune.
halib came under fire after he said on onday that he believed oeharto's public denial of charges that he had accumulated a fortune worth billions of .. dollars during his rule.
ut oeharto, who stepped down amid mounting public pressure on ay 21, swore that he did not have any deposits abroad in a statement broadcast by his own daughter's television station early this month.
uring the 32 year rule of oeharto, olkar had been in the government bandwagon, given an amen to virtually all the regime's policies and whims.
  ocal people and students in ndonesia's capital akarta held an anti-oeharto mass demonstration, starting at 14:00 local time on hursday.
eanwhile, tate ecretary/inister kbar anjung onday reiterated the government's seriousness in investigating oeharto's wealth.
e did not say when the results of the investigations will be announced.
 team of investigators will soon question oeharto, halib said without mentioning time and place for the questioning.
ithout such a letter, it will be hard for the team to ask foreign banks to open their records due to long-established banking secrecy policies, he added.
hief of the rosecutor's ffice in rian aya rovince ..
he purpose of his visit is to explain that witzerland's banking secrecy is "not absolute" as long as there is a formal demand from a particular country to launch investigations into a suspected bank account, he said.
ddressing a plenary meeting on ednesday, olkar spokesperson arwah aud brahim said the implementation of a clean government, with no traces of corruption, collusion and nepotism, is a prerequisite to achievement of the aims of the 1945 proclamation.
he faction's spokesman juhad ahja told reporters that they finally agreed with the decree on anti-corruption, collusion and nepotism because the faction's proposal had been accommodated in it.
"t is possible for the government to consider forgiving oeharto because of his age but his children and cronies should be tried and punished if they are proven guilty," ais added.
eanwhile, hairman of the ational andate arty mien ais urged the government to put oeharto under city arrest and to confiscate his wealth and that of his family and cronies.
"es, oeharto will receive the team soon," anjung said.
"ith this letter of authorization,  can go anywhere in the world to search accounts that may be held by oeharto," halib was quoted by the newspaper he ndonesian bserver uesday as saying.
"he result (of the investigations) of officials of both central and provincial governments will be announced to the public," pokesman arman ahir said.
e refused to disclose the details, saying that the investigation needs a long time.
oeharto, in a speech on the channel controlled by his eldest daughter iti ardijanti ukmana on unday, said: "he fact is,  don't have even one cent of savings abroad, don't have accounts at foreign banks... let alone hundreds of billion of dollars."
he team also found oeharto's personal saving accounts as much as 2.3 million . dollars in 72 domestic banks.
ommenting on the stand of the olkar on the subject, the akarta ost said, "his is another display of their halfhearted commitment to clean up corruption.
e cited the new decree of the special session of the eople's onsultative ssembly from ovember 10 through ovember 13.
owever, olkar voiced objections to proposals that the special  session adopt a special decree to investigate oeharto's wealth.
"he law should be upheld if we want reform to go on.
idabutar said they were also investigating thousands of hectares of land allegedly belonging to oeharto, his children and cronies.
t least five factories were built there, he said, adding that so far the probe has been focused on oeharto and his family and has yet to be directed at cronies.
"e will make the best of this offer... the minister of foreign affairs (li latas) has also offered to cooperate," halib said.
he demonstrators in great number moved toward residence of the former president at alancendana street in entral akarta.
juhad ahja  of the nited evelopment arty faction made the statement in the arliament building here hursday.
addressing a gathering on unday at the ogor nstitute of griculture in ogor, about 60 kilometers south of the capital, ndonesian oslem leader mien ais has asked oeharto to donate his wealth to the nation and also called on ndonesians to forgive the former president who had made great contribution to the country.
"e would not take the initiative (to launch the investigation), it has to come from the country of origin of the person (suspected of having illegally-gained deposits)," he added.
oeharto's fortune, part of which has been sold to his crony and noted businessman rayogo angestu, reportedly comprised stocks, land, a plywood factory, a bank, a pineapple cannery and a  relay station, worth 122.4 billion rupiah (15.3 million .. dollars) in all.
he time has come to bring economic and political criminals to court," he said after installing the executive board of the party's chapter in ampung rovince on uesday.
hould there be indications (that this wealth was amassed illegally), the government will pursue the case and take legal action," he told reporters.
eanwhile, according to a survey result by the ndonesian usiness ata enter which was published here onday, the assets of oeharto's family have reached 200 trillion rupiah (about 20 billion .. dollars).
 clause in a decree can easily be ignored, but a specific decree would give the needed impetus to kick start the investigation."
he paper quoted tate inister for and ffairs asan asru urin as saying ownership of the property would be canceled and sanctions applied if charges were proven.
 prominent crony, ob asan, for instance, apparently held a virtual monopoly on the supply of vegetables, meat, eggs, fruits and various other necessities for employees of  reeport ndonesia mining firm in rian aya.