n the il ar oods case, the griculture epartment left the announcement of the recall to the company.
ut no illnesses have been reported in connection to the beef produced on that day and the company said it had notified the .. epartment of griculture, which was testing the product.
lant officials at il ar voluntarily recalled about 35 million pounds of hot dogs and lunch meat on ec. 22.
o its credit, the griculture epartment has announced recalls of processed meats contaminated with listeria from four other companies in the last four months, most recently last weekend.
t a daylong public meeting on ednesday, officials said they had more questions than answers about a spike in outbreaks of listeriosis like the one traced to hot dogs and cold cuts at ichigan's il ar oods plant in ecember that has killed 16 people and sickened more than 70 in 14 states.
om kinner, a spokesman for the disease agency, said that on ec. 19, three days before the il ar recall, investigators isolated this strain of isteria on an open package of hot dogs that a month earlier had been eaten by one of those who became ill.
regnant women, the newborn, older adults and people with weakened immune systems are especially at risk.
nvestigators from the ederal enters for isease ontrol and revention who are looking into an outbreak of food poisoning that has sickened 40 people and killed four in 10 states since ugust have warned consumers on the storing and cooking of hot dogs and cold cuts.
lthough il ar is the only plant to have an outbreak with illnesses traced to its products, several others across the country have had to recall products after tests detected listeria.
il ar oods o., a meat processor owned by ara ee in eeland, ich., recalled 15 million pounds of hot dogs and cold cuts after a rare strain of the listeria bacteria was found in both opened and unopened packages.
ost at risk are pregnant women, the elderly and people with weak immune systems.
he meat was under test by the .. epartment of griculture.
he griculture epartment said it has no evidence, however, linking the product to a nationwide listeriosis outbreak that is under investigation.
he investigators say they do not know how the listeria contaminated the cooked meats at il ar oods.
he products, which were distributed nationwide and to foreign countries including ussia and outh orea by horn pple alley's orrest ity plant, may be contaminated with isteria monocytogenes, according to the .. griculture epartment's ood afety and nspection ervice announced.
hat recall, and one in anuary of about 30 million pounds of hot dogs and luncheon meat from the horn pple alley plant in rkansas, represent most of the increase in the pounds pulled from shelves for listeria contamination in recent years.
e don't want people to stop eating hot dogs and cold cut meats.''
fficials at the enters for isease ontrol had managed to trace 20 cases of food sickness to the il ar plant by ec. 18, and  officials said they met il ar executives to urge them to consider a recall then.
he outbreak led to the recall on uesday of certain lots of hot dogs and packaged meat produced at the il ar oods plant in eeland, ich., and sold throughout the nited tates.
ara ee orp. announced in late ecember a recall of hot dogs and other packaged meats as a precaution after an outbreak of food poisoning sickened more than 35 people in nine states, killing four.
``hat's important is that people at risk, such as the elderly and pregnant women, need to reduce their risk by avoiding these products or thoroughly cooking them before eating them.
he government has no reliable tracking system, but health officials say food-borne diseases account for up to 30 million cases of illness and 9,000 deaths a year.
ewer than 2,000 people in the nited tates report serious illness from listeriosis each year, but about one in four of them die from it.
ince eptember, there have been nine known recalls due to listeria, mostly from deli meats and hot dogs.
isteriosis affects primarily pregnant women, newborns and adults with weakened immune systems.
lthough the risk of listeriosis associated with foods from deli counters is relatively low, the disease agency says pregnant women and immunosuppressed people may choose to avoid these foods or thoroughly reheat cold cuts before eating.
or now, he and other experts, remind people to cook hot dogs and eat deli meats before the sell-by date.
he number of shipments of food for which the  is responsible has increased to 2.2 million from 1.5 million five years ago.
ut some state public health officials say the outbreak could have been contained sooner had the griculture epartment done its job.
  ecent outbreaks of listeriosis are causing an immediate public health problem, federal agriculture officials said in launching a review of whether to require more testing for the deadly bacterium.
roducts from the il ar plant, for example, are distributed all over the nited tates.
o far, no cases of illness have been linked to the recalled products, the  said.
he agency is studying whether some of the il ar products might contain the isteria bacteria.
he brand names of the hot dogs and lunch combinations included in the horn pple alley recall are:
il ar is a division of ara ee orp.
regnant women, about 20 times more likely than other healthy adults to get listeriosis, should be particularly careful to never eat raw meat or undercooked eggs or food, the  recommends.
eople with  are almost 300 times more likely to get listeriosis than people with normal immune systems.
  ore than 250,000 kilograms of ground beef in 33 .. states have been recalled because the meat might contain a deadly strain of . coli.
 recall of meats made by a ara ee orp. subsidiary, il ar oods in eeland, ich., began on ec. 22.
  onsumers who have purchased meat products manufactured at horn pple alley's orrest ity, rk., plant in the last six months are being urged to return them because of concerns of possible contamination with the isteria monocytogenes bacteria.
ome griculture epartment officials said they would like more legal authority to focus on the danger to public health when they recommend recalls, so they can warn the public faster.
he recall includes dozens of brand names, based on information collected by the department's ood afety and nspection ervice and provided by the company.
he griculture epartment announced the recall riday night.
owever,  officials said they did not feel comfortable recommending a recall until they found a package of unopened meat with the bacterium at the plant.
t this point, as far as  can tell, the number of pregnant women who are aware of this is zero.''
side from causing stillbirths and miscarriages, listeriosis also can cause serious and sometimes fatal infections in people with weakened immune systems: infants, the elderly or patients with chronic diseases,  infection or undergoing cancer chemotherapy.
``e have explored whether or not there might be a new strain or new characteristics in listeria that's causing it to be more difficult to control,'' rawford said.
``ut it's something pregnant women should be made aware of.
ased on the findings and conditions at the plant, the agency concluded there may be a public health risk associated with the product.
nd there may still be tainted hot dogs or deli meats in people's freezers.
he disease control agency said healthy adults and children were occasionally infected with isteria, but rarely became seriously ill. eople with weakened immune systems, including those with cancer, diabetes and kidney disease, are much more vulnerable.
hen ingested, isteria bacteria can cause illness and death among the elderly, pregnant women, newborns and those with weakened immune systems.
ut it is a big risk to people 75 and older, people with compromised immune systems, pregnant women and the very young.
ver the weekend, it announced the recall of hot dogs from horn pple alley in orrest ity, rk., because of listeria.
esearchers said .coli 157:7 accounts for more than 20,000 infections and 200 deaths annually in the nited tates.
``e want to commend the company for taking this step,'' said kinner of the disease control agency, noting that the company was cooperating with federal investigators.
hen the first reports of a food-poisoning outbreak from hot dogs and deli meats started to accumulate in state health departments across the nited tates last ugust, officials could not have guessed that the effort to contain the eruption would be so ineffective that they would still be counting victims five months later.
t's an increase from the corresponding period a year earlier when the griculture epartment recorded just one listeria-related recall.
he investigation into the source and cause of the outbreak was continuing, he said.
n estimated 1,100 people in the nited tates become seriously ill each year from eating food contaminated with isteria.
bout 1,800 cases of food poisoning caused by listeria are reported in the nited tates each year.
`` don't feel that recalls are the answer,'' he said, ``because we don't want . coli in the meat to begin with.
t the meeting, some federal officials also questioned whether they acted quickly enough in the il ar recall.
``ood-borne diseases are a continuing problem that have not yet been resolved,'' said r. obert auxe, chief of the food-borne and diarrheal diseases branch of the enters for isease ontrol and revention.
ny lunch meat or hot dogs should be thoroughly heated.
he previous week, the agency announced the recall of deli meat from scar ayer oods for the same bacteria, as it did in ctober for hot dogs made by ixie ackers nc. of adison, la., and cheeseburger sandwiches from ormel ood orp.
here have been many large outbreaks of food-borne illness in the last year, including one just last week that made a ew ork woman ill and resulted in the recall of 172,000 pounds of ground-beef patties contaminated with the deadly bacteria . coli 157:7.
till, r. ichael sterholm, the state epidemiologist at the innesota ealth epartment, says he is increasingly frustrated with the federal government's response to outbreaks of food poisoning, and even with the new detection system.
he number of people who inspect the food has remained the same.
ut government officials say more action is needed.
etter testing and reporting is the more likely reason, said argaret lavin, associate administrator for 's food safety and inspection service.
``y 1994, the  (enters for isease ontrol) was proclaiming that this was one of the most successful regulatory actions in .. history,'' rawford said.
he current outbreak associated with il ar has been blamed for 13 deaths and two miscarriages or in all, there have been 70 confirmed cases.
o reduce the risks, the disease centers, recommends thoroughly cooking raw food from animal sources, washing raw vegetables, and keeping uncooked meats separate from vegetables.
nd unless people at risk are willing to eat salami, corned beef and pastrami hot _ in other words, cooked again _ they should not eat them at all.
lub ack hot dogs, and rillmaster, ygrade, urkey, ara ee eli eat and ara ee ome oast brands.
``e're sort of left with no real answer,'' rawford said.
os ngeles, ovember 4 (inhua)   .. company said ednesday that it was recalling all ground beef it produced on ctober 22 because it may contain the potentially deadly .coli 157:7 bacteria.
npasteurized apple juice, contaminated with . coli 157:7, caused the death of a 16-month-old child last year and led to the hospitalization of a dozen other children.
hey are a man from the ochester, .., area, and two others from hio, one from oledo and one from incinnati.
ecorded information is available 24 hours a day.
t's a classic example of emerging infections common in atin merica becoming a problem here.''
``e used to believe you had to travel overseas to get travelers' diarrhea.
``isteria hasn't been on anyone's radar screen,'' auxe said.
he fourth victim, from the oledo area, was a fetus.
ennessee, assachusetts and est irginia have each had 3.
onnecticut, regon, ermont and eorgia have had one each.
eeking the source, health officials from ew ork, onnecticut, hio and ennessee worked with the agency to examine the diets of affected patients.
``ongress is sitting on its hands while we watch all these outbreaks occur around this country,'' said aroline mith deaal, director of food safety for the enter for cience in the ublic nterest, an advocacy group based in ashington, ``and things are not going to get better without resources and authority to regulate food.''
 resident linton plans to press ongress on aturday to provide all $101 million he has sought to ensure the safety of the nation's food supply.
ccording to an advance text of his aturday radio address, the president will also ask ongress to give the ood and rug dministration ``greater authority to halt imports of fruits, vegetables and other food products that are produced under safety conditions that do not match our own strict standards,'' and to give the epartment of griculture ``new authority to impose tough fines on businesses who violate those standards and to issue mandatory recall of unsafe meat and poultry.''
he epartment of griculture has the power to bar imported meat and poultry, but in a report issued in ay, the eneral ccounting ffice, an investigative arm of ongress, said ``ederal agencies cannot ensure that the growing volume of imported food is safe for consumers,'' and recommended that the power of equivalency be extended to cover all foods eligible for import.
n 1993, the agency asked the administration for the power to bar fruits, vegetables, grains, fish and other food from countries with food-safety systems inferior to that of the nited tates.
``ecause we have an immediate public health problem, our first goal is to establish an immediate action plan to address improvements in the control of listeria,'' said homas illy, administrator of 's ood afety and nspection ervice.
ut listeria can kill, by causing meningitis or blood infection.
er advice for other pregnant women is ``ask more questions, be more informed.''
ost had eaten cooked hot dogs the month before they became ill.
uncheon meat in her has been turned over to the local health department for testing.
ut health officials find it especially troubling because, based on the number of reported cases, the percentage of people who die from it is much higher than from most other food-borne bacteria.
arlier this year,  recalled a shipment of 282,129 pounds of beef after a sample was found to be tainted by the same bacteria.
hey also say consumers should be careful not to reheat leftovers more than once.
he focus is on ready-to-eat foods such as luncheon meats because the bacterium can be killed if it is cooked until steaming hot, or past about 170 degrees.
here were also 30 stillbirths and deaths of newborns.
hey also should avoid soft cheeses, such as feta or rie, and avoid food from deli counters.
 variety of brand names are included in the recall but the key to discovering potentially contaminated product is in coding on the packages.
o consumer illnesses have yet been linked to the products, which were distributed nationwide and shipped to foreign countries, including outh orea and ussia, and manufactured after uly 6, 1998.
he culprit, investigators say, is a strain of air and soil-borne bacteria known as isteria monocytogenes, which is carried in the intestines of animals and can easily come into contact with raw vegetables, dairy products or uncooked meat.
ut consumers may have a difficult time understanding why those recalls were announced by the government and il ar's was not.
``isteria is rare,'' said r. obert auxe, chief of the food-borne and diarrheal diseases branch of the enters for isease ontrol and revention in tlanta, ``but in someone susceptible, it is catastrophic.''
regnant women and their unborn children are in the greatest danger.
nly meats with the codes `` 13529'' or ``- 13529'' on the product package are subject to the recall.
()   meat processing plant is voluntarily recalling all frankfurter and lunch combination products it produced since uly 6 because they may be contaminated.
, the world's largest processor of fresh beef, said in a report the recall involved 556,226 pounds of ground beef produced at its plant in akota ity, ebraska.
ast week, scar ayer oods orp. recalled more than 28,000 pounds of deli meat because of concerns of possible contamination with the isteria bacteria.
linton also plans to announce two steps the administration can take without congressional authority to protect food safety, administration officials said.
``f there had been a real effort to get the message out by the epartment of griculture throughout the country, consumers would have had more awareness,'' he said.
he number of people who survive cancer for five years has also increased, as has the number of people who have  or are living with transplanted organs.
``he new information based on this outbreak brings into question the adequacy of control procedures we've been relying on,'' illy said.
t inspects slightly more than 1.5 percent of all foreign shipments, and among imported produce items, a source for some extremely serious outbreaks of food-borne illness, only 0.2 percent were sampled last year.
n other cases, the griculture epartment did take action.
hree who have died in this outbreak have been elderly.
``f you thoroughly cook your hot dogs,'' kinner said, ``you kill the isteria.
isteria is carried in the intestines of animals and can easily come in contact with dairy products, uncooked meats, fish, poultry and vegetables as well as precooked meats like the ones responsible for the ugust outbreak.
hil erfler, a  deputy director, suggested there should be legislation allowing the agency to require a recall ``based on the threat to public health rather than what it can show about the content of the food.''
he agency does not announce recalls until it has proof that a sealed product contains the disease-causing bacteria, and it did not have that proof until ec. 31, nine days later.
he system was set up in 1997 to track . coli 0157:7, but it appears to be equally successful with listeria.
he meat-packing giant  nc. disclosed that a sample of beef taken on ctober 22 from its akota ity plant could be tainted with . coli 157:7, an ssociated ress report said.
nlike salmonella and . coli 0157:7, which have become household words in the nited tates, listeria is not well known.
his fact has been underscored in the last few months by two unexpected outbreaks of food-borne illnesses: travelers' diarrhea, or enterotoxigenic . coli, from potato salad, which sickened 4,000 people in llinois, and salmonella in breakfast cereal, which made 200 people ill in 11 states.
t is not known how or where this package was contaminated.
espite what auxe described as ``extraordinary efforts'' to prevent . coli 157:7 from contaminating meat, it continues to be a problem.
f they can say we will cut food-borne illness by so much, 'm sure the members would say that is a serious proposal.
efore the uly 4 recess, the ouse voted to provide only $16.8 million of the requested money, and the enate bill, which has not been voted on, provides just $2.6 million.
ut ongress has failed to address legislation proposed by the administration to give the food agencies greater authority, and it appears unlikely that ongress will provide the full amount of money the administration has requested to expand inspections, increase research and surveillance of food-borne illness and educate consumers.
isteria monocytogenes is a bacteria that healthy people usually fight off but sometimes can kill.
ealthy people usually can fight off the bacterium with no more than flu-like symptoms.
hio has had the largest number of cases, 13.
t thrives in refrigerators, but can be destroyed by boiling or reheating food to 165 degrees ahrenheit.
 blood test is the most reliable way to diagnose the disease.
here are only 1,000 to 2,000 reported cases of listeriosis in the nited tates each an accurate figure cannot be obtained, as health professionals do not routinely test for it and many cases go undetected.
``e felt the word was out there and an additional press release would not have generated new news coverage,'' he said.
n addition to causing miscarriages and stillbirths, listeria can cause fatal blood infections and meningitis.
hat plant has a production capacity of 400,000 pounds of hot dogs per day, according to the company.
he same strain, pattern , has been linked to 12 adult deaths and five miscarriages among 82 illnesses in 19 states.
t is also revisiting the shelf life of foods to see if the bacterium grows quickly at particular times or in particular foods after they are processed.
``hose people are one of the highest-risk populations in the country,'' sterholm said.
omplications associated with the 157:7 strain can lead to kidney failure, severe anemia, clotting problems and, in some cases, coma and death.
ut the company decided ednesday to recall it.
``e don't see an uptrend in the number of positives we're finding,'' she said.
``ecause of the potential of foodborne illness, we urge consumers who have purchased the suspect product not to eat it and return it to the point of purchase,'' said argaret lavin, associate administrator of the .
ands, knives and cutting boards should be washed after coming into contact with uncooked foods.
s usual, the last line of defense against food-borne illness is consumers, who are advised to take the standard measures: thorough cooking of raw animal products, thorough washing of all food that is to be eaten raw like fruits and keeping foods to be eaten raw separate from uncooked thorough washing of hands, knives and cutting boards.
isteria was a real problem for the nited tates in the mid-1980s, said r. ester rawford, director of eorgetown niversity's enter for ood and utrition olicy, but the government declared zero tolerance for the pathogen.
ooking in the microwave is not recommended.
 person answering the telephone at the plant onday said no one could comment about the scale of the recall.
ut how does this advice fit in with meats that people expect to eat without further cooking?
he chairman of the enate ppropriations subcommittee on agriculture, had ochran, -iss., said that even though some new programs proposed by the administration had merit, the committee did not have the money for them.
ive tested positive for isteria monocytogenes bacteria, which can cause high fever, severe headache, neck stiffness and nausea.
nlike many other disease-causing bacteria, listeria can grow in a refrigerator that has a normal temperature of 40 degrees, which means leftovers should be reheated.
ince 1988, the number of products recalled for life-threatening microbial contamination has increased almost fivefold, according to the .
hey also say that it is essential to cook hot dogs until the internal temperature reaches 165 degrees, by either steaming or frying.
``e cannot have a breakfast-cereal plant having failures like that, and that's an inspection problem.''
he population is aging: n 1950, 2.6 percent of mericans were over by 1995, the percentage was 5.6.
ood-borne diseases like listeriosis are more troubling today for several reasons, including changes in the makeup of the population and the increasingly complex way food is processed and distributed.
arther ahead, the agency is considering whether industry should be required to do its own testing.
nd domestically, the agency inspects food plants only every 10 years, on average.
o far, no evidence has been found to support that theory.
hey should also avoid soft cheeses like feta, rie, amembert, blue-veined and exican-style cheese.
nd that recall was at the end of 1997, the only recall of that year.
ithout a new method of detection, auxe said, `` don't think we would have identified where the listeria came from.''
he plant was shut down for sanitary reasons by the  on ec. 31.
ublic health officials strongly urge those at greatest risk from listeria to stay away from all soft cheeses, including feta and blue-veined cheeses like oquefort and amembert.
``e have stopped operations for those product lines at the plant,'' heresa erlevsen, a spokeswoman for ara ee, said in a telephone interview, emphasizing that there had been no conclusive information about contamination of these products.
n roome ounty, in upstate ew ork, they say, eals on heels was still serving the il ar products to elderly clients eight days after the recall, because it had not been notified.
``t certainly seems like it's on the rise,'' said r. obert . ravani, professor of food science at ornell niversity.
his is the third major recall in a month of meat products.
he department suspended operations at the rkansas plant on ec. 31 because of its noncompliance with sanitation requirements.
ne measure is an  rule requiring warning labels on all packaged juice that has not been pasteurized or processed to kill harmful bacteria.
he products recalled were only those labeled with stablishment umbers  261 or  6911 for all ark, il ar, ryan unsize, and ryan 3-lb.
etailers, food service operations and distributors in a total of 33 states have been identified as having received the ground beef, said the company, adding that much of it is believed to have been consumed already.
onsumers may return the recalled products to the place of purchase for a full refund.
s. erlevesen said ara ee estimated the cost of the recall at $50 million to $70 million.
he recall does not include any prepackaged fresh or frozen beef patties.
ot ogs: orman ranks, partan ranks, ops ranks, lways ave ranks, ilson ranks, iggly iggly ranks, unnoes ranks, airgrounds ranks, est ranks, olonial ranks, epco ranks, annaford ranks, ilson arms ranks, ig ns ranks, arters ranks, owa old ranks, errud ranks, orn ing ranks, inn ixie ranks, chnucks ranks, lavor ing ranks, horn pple alley ranks.
isteria levels dropped sharply, rawford said.
``ntil the day the agencies can quantitatively answer how much it would cost to reduce food-borne illness,'' said ohn iolkowski, a staff member of the ouse ppropriations ommittee, ``they won't get any more money.
ut ongress seems unlikely to cooperate.
nd in his radio address, the president will announce what the administration can do without congressional approval.
r. lizabeth och, acting state epidemiologist in hio, said the  of the bacteria involved in the outbreak showed ``a very rare pattern,'' called attern .
  isa ee, pregnant with twins, had less than five months left before the due date when she came down with what seemed to be the flu.
ymptoms are those of a flu-like illness, and may include a fever, muscle aches, nausea, diarrhea or a stiff neck.
oth he and ale orris, the director of the division of infectious disease of the ew ork tate ealth epartment, say there can never be enough notification.
n a normal year, an estimated 1,850 people become seriously ill. f these, 425 die.
he  now deals with imported food only after it arrives.
xperts also found no evidence that a new scientific-based food inspection program, 's azard nalysis and ritical ontrol oint, has failed.
merican scientists began to take listeria seriously in 1985, when 18 deaths were traced to the eating of alisco brand soft cheese.
e said experts are trying to determine whether the incidents are due to better reporting or whether the listeria really is appearing more frequently.
he suspected bacterium is found in soil and water.
ee's once-rare disease has received tremendous attention in recent months, especially since a massive recall in ecember of possibly tainted food from a ichigan plant.
he potato salad outbreak is equally worrisome, he said.
``almonella in breakfast cereal is basically a first for us in this country,'' auxe said.
fter several days of debate among medical experts,  officials clearly determined there was a public health threat on ec. 22, the day of the recall, said r. aul ead of the .
t includes all meat and poultry products bearing the codes `` 13529'' or `` 13529'' anywhere on the package.
octors now say the prospective mother was struck by listeriosis, a disease caused by the bacteria isteria monocytogenes, a food-borne pathogen often found in hot dogs, luncheon meats, soft cheese, even milk.
he was rushed to the hospital last month and was cured but lost both babies in the process.
nd the incubation period is much longer, up to 70 days before symptoms appear.
ow the sudden rise in recalls has experts baffled.
o, why is listeria suddenly popping up?
 spokesman ary ickelson said 71 retail, food service and distribution customers bought the ground beef, sold in vacuum-packaged tubes.
nstead, ochran suggested that some of the ood and rug dministration's duties be delegated to states and local governments.
'm sure we didn't for a lot of people.''
 second measure is the creation of a national institute for food safety research to coordinate public and private research.
hen ongress returns from its recess, en. om arkin, -owa, will offer an amendment to restore all of the original $101 million for the president's food safety initiative.
he new system, called ulsenet, gives scientists the ability to fingerprint the  of bacteria and then compare the fingerprints to see if the listeria is from a common source.
or isa ee, it was a risk she says she never knew existed.
isteria monocytogenes is not a serious threat to healthy people, causing only short-term gastrointestinal problems.
ut advocates of free trade oppose ceding that power, called equivalency, and no action, executive or legislative, has been taken.
he hotline is staffed from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m.  onday through riday.
hat's a sign that additional efforts are needed.''
n addition, the centralization of food production has turned what might previously have been a small local problem into a global one.
f anything, they argue, 's inspections, which monitor things like temperature in the processing system, have helped.
etween uly and ecember 1998, government inspectors collected 20 ready-to-eat samples from the plant.
hose concerned about illnesses they suspect are related to these products should contact their physicians immediately.
he new labeling rule will take effect in time for the apple cider season.
unch combinations: chnucks ologna with merican heese, roger urkey reast with heddar, roger ooked am with wiss heese, roger ologna with merican heese, yee urkey reast with heddar, y ee ologna with merican heese, est ologna with merican heese, afeway urkey reast with heddar, afeway ooked am with wiss heese, afeway ologna with merican heese, mart elections urkey reast with heddar, mart elections ologna with merican heese, mart elections urkey am with merican heese, mart elections ooked am with wiss heese, ady ee urkey reast with heddar, ady ee am with merican heese, ady ee ooked am with wiss heese, ady ee ologna with merican heese, owa old urkey reast with heddar, owa old ologna with merican heese, owa old ooked am with wiss heese, ave  ot urkey reast with heddar, ave  ot ooked am with wiss heese.
ince 1989, when the government implemented stricter policies for the bacterium, illnesses from listeria monocytogenes have dropped 44 percent.