(AP) -- The trial for one of two men accused in the beating death of University of Wyoming student Matthew Shepard has been postponed.
(AP) -- The trial for one of two men accused in the beating death of University of Wyoming student Matthew Shepard will begin with jury selection March 24.
WASHINGTON (AP) -- The day before one of the men accused of killing her son was going on trial in Wyoming, the mother of gay college student Matthew Shepard lobbied tearfully for hate-crime laws that could deter future acts of violence.
Authorities said Henderson and Aaron McKinney, 21, posed as homosexuals and lured the 5-foot-2, 105-pound Shepard out of a bar Oct. 6, kidnapped and pistol-whipped him and left him tied to a fence in the cold.
(AP) -- Seven people were dismissed Thursday as jury selection continued in the trial of a man accused in the beating death of gay college student Matthew Shepard.
(AP) -- One of two men arrested in the beating death of gay college student Matthew Shepard merely watched while the other man pistol-whipped Shepard and left him to die, a defense attorney said Wednesday as jury selection began.
(AP) -- A prosecutor asked 71 prospective jurors today to set aside the emotions of pity and rage if chosen for the trial in the death of gay college student Matthew Shepard.
``Russell Henderson was a witness to the beating of Matthew Shepard,'' Skaggs said.
(AP) -- Fourteen people were dismissed Thursday as jury selection continued in the trial of a man accused of beating gay college student Matthew Shepard to death.
``The defense will contend that Russell did not participate in the beating and did not share in the proceeds of the robbery,'' said Wyatt Skaggs, the lawyer for 21-year-old Russell Henderson.
(AP) -- The strategy for the first defendant on trial in the beating death of gay college student Matthew Shepard is clear: blame the co-defendant.
``The academic community is generally perceived as one that is less in favor of the death penalty and more inclined to seek out the emotionalism as to what has happened and why,'' he said.
Authorities said Henderson and McKinney, both high-school dropouts, posed as homosexuals and lured the 5-foot-2, 105-pound Shepard out of a bar last October and then kidnapped and beat him, leaving him lashed to a fence.
``Russell Henderson was a witness to the beating of Matthew Shepard,'' attorney Wyatt Skaggs told prospective jurors as Henderson's trial opened Wednesday.
``The defense will contend that Russell did not participate in the beating and did not share in the proceeds of the robbery,'' he said.
Both Henderson and McKinney are accused of first-degree murder, kidnapping and aggravated robbery in an attack that led to demands for stronger hate-crime laws around the country.
Skaggs asked prospective jurors not to punish his client for the sake of redeeming this small town's image in the eyes of the nation.
Authorities said Henderson and McKinney, both high-school dropouts, posed as homosexuals and lured the 5-foot-2, 105-pound Shepard out of a bar last October and then kidnapped and beat him.
Authorities said the pair pretended to be homosexual and lured the 5-foot-2, 105-pound Shepard out of a downtown bar before they beat him and then left him lashed to a fence in a remote area east of town.
(AP) -- Police stepped up patrols today outside the courthouse for the trial of one of two men accused of murdering gay college student Matthew Shepard.
Shepard, a political science major at the University of Wyoming, was not found for hours and died five days later at a hospital.
The other man charged in the slaying, Aaron McKinney, 21, is set to go on trial in August.
Henderson, along with Aaron McKinney, allegedly kidnapped and pistol-whipped Shepard and left him tied to a fence in the cold.
Henderson, along with Aaron McKinney, allegedly kidnapped and pistol-whipped Shepard and left him tied to a fence in the cold.
But they can reduce them,'' Mrs. Shepard said at a news conference in Washington, D.C. ``They can help change the climate in this country, where some people feel it is okay to target specific groups of people and get away with it.''
But they can reduce them,'' Judy Shepard said at a news conference in Washington, D.C. ``They can help change the climate in this country, where some people feel it is okay to target specific groups of people and get away with it.''
Henderson and the 21-year-old McKinney both face the death penalty if convicted in a case that has become a central focus for gay rights activists and others seeking stronger bias crime legislation.
Prosecutor Cal Rerucha also told the panel to remember that Shepard, who was beaten and left tied to a fence in near-freezing weather last fall, was ``a victim that was different, a victim that was not the same as you and I.''
Henderson and Aaron McKinney, both 21, are charged with murder and face the death penalty if convicted.
Russell Henderson, 21, is accused of posing as a homosexual to lure the 5-foot-2, 105-pound Shepard out of a bar Oct. 6.
Russell Henderson, 21, is accused of posing as a homosexual to lure the 5-foot-2, 105-pound Shepard out of a bar Oct. 6.
During his comments to potential jurors, defense attorney Wyatt Skaggs shifted the blame for the killing to Henderson's co-defendant, Aaron McKinney, who was to be tried later.
Henderson and his co-defendant, Aaron McKinney, 21, both face the death penalty if convicted in a case that has become a central focus for gay rights activists and others seeking stronger bias crime legislation.
Authorities said Henderson and McKinney posed as homosexuals and lured the 5-foot-2, 105-pound Shepard out of a bar, kidnapped him, pistol-whipped him and stole $20.
He asked potential jurors not to punish his client to redeem this small town's image in the eyes of the nation.
Henderson and Aaron James McKinney, both 21, are charged with murder and face the death penalty if convicted.
The University of Wyoming student died five days later at a hospital.
The University of Wyoming student died five days later at a hospital.
The University of Wyoming student died five days later at a hospital.
Judge Jeffrey A. Donnell moved the start of the trial for Russell Arthur Henderson from March 22 to April 6 due to a scheduling conflict involving one of the attorneys.
Prosecutor Cal Rerucha told the prospective jurors that Shepard was ``not the same as you and I'' but that every individual should be treated equally under the Constitution.
The savagery of the Shepard and Byrd slayings horrified the nation, giving new impetus to consideration of hate-crimes laws in Washington and state capitals.
Prosecutor Cal Rerucha told the potential jurors that Shepard was ``not the same as you and I'' but that every individual should be treated equally under the Constitution.
(AP) -- In the weeks after the beating death of gay student Matthew Shepard, this college town found itself portrayed as backwards, homophobic, an outpost of Wild West-style violence and small-mindedness.
As he said this, Matthew Shepard's mother, Judy, who was in the last row of the courtroom, slowly looked down.
Henderson is accused of pistol-whipping Shepard, lashing him to a fence in Wyoming's high plains and leaving him to die last fall.
``They can help change the climate in this country, where some people feel it is okay to target specific groups of people and get away with it.''
Henderson's attorney said his client was only a witness and did not participate in Shepard's beating.
Henderson's attorney said his client was only a witness and did not participate in Shepard's beating.
``Are any of you here going to judge this case because you feel guilty and want to make a statement to the nation?''
``Are any of you here going to judge this case because you feel guilty and want to make a statement to the nation?''
By the end of the day, 15 of 71 prospective jurors in the first pool had been dismissed.
The University of Wyoming student died five days later.
Henderson and McKinney, both 21, face the death penalty if convicted.
The political science major at the University of Wyoming died five days later at a hospital.
The political science major at the University of Wyoming died five days later at a hospital.
``They don't want the world to think that's the type of thing that happens in their town.''
``They don't want the world to think that's the type of thing that happens in their town.''
Henderson stood by and watched while his friend Aaron McKinney brutally pistol-whipped Shepard, 21, and left him to die, Skaggs said.
With the first of Shepard's alleged attackers set to go on trial for his life Wednesday, those images of Laramie could work to prosecutors' advantage.
Joseph Rice, a clinical psychologist and jury consultant in San Francisco, cited what he said is a key difference between this case and the Jasper, Texas, dragging-death trial, in which a white man was swifly convicted and sentenced to die for dragging a black man to pieces.
America, he said, has ``moved further along on the issue of race and people tend to know what the `right' answer is.''
Mrs. Shepard declined to discuss the trial, saying only that she and her husband ``want to allow justice to run its course.''
Mrs. Shepard declined to discuss the trial, saying only that she and her husband ``want to allow justice to run its course.''
Mrs. Shepard declined to discuss the trial, saying only that she and her husband ``want to allow justice to run its course.''
Jury questioning for the rest of the week will be closed to the public.
By the end of the day, 15 of the 71 prospective jurors in the first pool had been dismissed, many for financial, medical or child-care related decisions.
Shepard died following a brutal beating near Laramie in October that police said was motivated in part because he was gay.
Russell Henderson, 21, is charged with murder, kidnapping and aggravated robbery in Shepard's grisly beating death last October.
Her son, a University of Wyoming freshman, was pistol-whipped, lashed to a fence and left for dead last October.
Asked about having to endure the trials of the two murder suspects, Osborn said, ``It's going to be very difficult.''
Asked about having to endure the trials of the two murder suspects, Osborn said, ``It's going to be very difficult.''
He was left for dead, tied to a fence in the 28-degree chill of Wyoming's high plains.
There were no protesters before the court session got under way, but authorities set aside areas for them during the trial of Russell Henderson, 21.
The trial is expected to last five weeks.
The trial is expected to last five weeks.
Jim Osborn, who attended grade school with Shepard and remained his friend, stopped by the courthouse on his way to work to remember Shepard.
Opening arguments in Russell Henderson's trial have been scheduled for April 6, according to Judge Jeffrey Donnell.
Betty Hoover, a jury consultant based in Raleigh, N.C., said the jurors may be eager to show that the people of Laramie, population 26,000, are progressive, law-abiding folks.
Her plea was seconded by a relative of James Byrd Jr., the black man who was chained to the back of a pickup truck last summer and dragged to his death over East Texas roads.
Judge Jeffrey Donnell delayed the start of the trial because of a scheduling conflict involving one of the attorneys.
City spokesman Randy Vickers said police have set up fences to keep news reporters and demonstrators at bay, and access to the courthouse has been limited to one door, where two metal detectors have been installed.
McKinney is scheduled to stand trial in August.
The first of Shepard's two alleged attackers, Russell Henderson, goes on trial Wednesday.
Police have said the attack was motivated in part because he was gay.
City spokesman Randy Vickers said police have set up fences to keep news reporters and demonstrators at bay, and access to the Albany County Courthouse has been limited to one door, where two metal detectors have been installed.
Jury selection was to begin today, with opening statements scheduled for April 6.
``Laramie's small enough that if you don't know the victim, you at least know people who do,'' he said.
``Laramie's small enough that if you don't know the victim, you at least know people who do,'' he said.
On Tuesday, Shepard's mother asked Congress and state legislatures to enact bias crime laws to deter future acts of violence.
On Tuesday, Shepard's mother asked Congress and state legislatures to enact bias crime laws to deter future acts of violence.
``The message is if you are in any way like this individual, you are hated, you are subhuman, you have no right to be on this earth, and if possible, all people like you should be exterminated from this earth.''
During the morning session, Henderson, 21, showed little emotion and occasionally looked at the pool of possible jurors seated in the courtroom's spectator section.
Betty Hoover, a jury consultant based in Raleigh, N.C., said jurors may be eager to show that the people of Laramie, population 26,000, are progressive, law-abiding folks.
McKinney's trial is scheduled for August.
Jim Osborn, who attended grade school with Shepard and remained his friend, stopped by the courthouse on his way to work.
``If you've got a small town where nothing like this has ever happened, then they are definitely going to do their best to portray that they care,'' she said.
``If you've got a small town where nothing like this has ever happened, then they are definitely going to do their best to portray that they care,'' she said.
The crime led to demands for stronger hate-crime laws around the country.
McKinney's trial is set for Aug. 9.
McKinney's trial is set for Aug. 9.
During the session, Skaggs put his arm around Henderson and told the jurors: ``This is not a defendant, not a person, but a real live living human being.
The press wants us to think that we are somehow responsible for what went on Oct. 6,'' he said.
Skaggs also told the jury candidates that the case ``is not about lifestyles.''
The crime shocked the nation and drew condemnation from President Clinton and Congress and calls for stronger bias crime laws.
Judy Shepard and Byrd nephew Daryl Verrett appeared at a Washington news conference organized by the Human Rights Campaign and the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights, urging Congress and state legislatures to enact new statutes against hate crimes.
Rerucha's statements came as the trial of Russell Henderson began in Albany County District Court.
Phil Holt, a 52-year-old Greek literature professor at the University of Wyoming, said he was relieved after being excused from jury selection Thursday.
Phil Holt, a 52-year-old Greek literature professor at the University of Wyoming, said he was relieved after being excused from jury selection Thursday.
In Byrd's case, the first of three white men accused in his slaying, white supremacist John William King, was sentenced last month to death by lethal injection.
But he emphasized that the Constitution requires all people to be treated fairly under the law.
He died in a hospital five days later.
The prospective jurors will be questioned individually in the judge's chambers.
Both men could get the death penalty.
Both men could get the death penalty.
Both men could get the death penalty.
Some congressional Republicans have suggested the legislation is unnecessary because state laws protect the groups identified in the bill.
``The press wants us to think that we are somehow responsible for what went on October 6.''
Shepard died following a brutal beating in Laramie in October.
I think Matthew Shepard's lifestyle was part of this.''
I know some people close to Henderson's family.
I know some people close to Henderson's family.
Still, police stepped up patrols today outside the courthouse because anti-gay protesters and gay rights advocates have clashed repeatedly over the case.
Opening statements are scheduled for April 6.
Opening statements are scheduled for April 6.
Opening statements are set for April 6.
Measures pending in Congress would make federal prosecution of hate crimes easier and would expand existing statutes, allowing the Justice Department to prosecute crimes that were based on a person's sex, sexual orientation or disability.
``The most important thing is: My friend is dead,'' Osborn said.
``The most important thing is: My friend is dead,'' Osborn said.
Henderson's trial was originally set for March 22.
Anti-gay protesters and gay rights advocates have clashed repeatedly over the Shepard case.
Despite the attention given the case, there were only a few spectators in the courtroom.
Twenty-two of 71 potential jurors have been dismissed.
Shepard's mother, Judy, remained mostly impassive during the first day of jury selection.
``The homosexual issue is less cut-and-dried, a little more difficult to measure,'' Rice said.
``There is no guarantee that these laws will stop hate crimes from happening.
``There is no guarantee that these laws will stop hate crimes from happening.
``There is no guarantee that these laws will stop hate crimes from happening.
But Verrett said hate crimes, unlike most other crimes, are meant to have impact beyond the immediate victim.
``I know some people who knew Shepard.
``I know some people who knew Shepard.
Opening statements were scheduled for April 6.
George W. Bush and others who question the need for special hate-crime statutes.
Bush said Monday: ``People, when they commit a crime, have hate in their heart.
The selection process, which began Wednesday, is going on behind closed doors.
``Hate crimes are done to send a message of terror to persons of different color, religious beliefs, sexual orientations, ethnicity, nationality or etc.,'' Verrett said.
Jon Forwood, a prosecutor in nearby Cheyenne, said the university setting will probably help the defense.
The selection process, which began Monday, is going on behind closed doors.
Twenty-nine of 71 potential jurors have been dismissed.
After the attack, Laramie found itself portrayed as a backwards, homophobic outpost of Wild West-style violence and small-mindedness.
I think it's hard to distinguish between one degree of hate or another.''
And some social conservatives bridle at what they view as special protections for homosexuals.
By the lunch break, 10 prospective jurors had been dismissed for various reasons, including health and business issues.
They all come down to some real simple motives,'' he said.
He also warned jurors they would be seeing ``really, really graphic'' photos during the trial.
But they can reduce them,'' Mrs. Shepard said haltingly, her statement punctuated by sobs.
Individual questioning of potential jurors continued today behind closed doors.
One woman was dismissed for child care reasons.
Skaggs also said the slaying wasn't premeditated.
``It's a question less people have considered in their own minds.''
It sent shock waves through the town.''
It sent shock waves through the town.''
Can all of you give him a fair shot?''
More than 40 states have hate crimes laws, but only 21 cover sexual orientation.
Officials said about 30 people would be questioned.
One prospective juror, a man in his 40s, objected quickly: ``No, I disagree.
The killing ``has literally injected into our community a feeling of guilt.
Now, the statute only covers crimes based on race, color, religion or national origin.
Outside the courthouse, clearly marked protest areas were empty.
Fenced-off areas for protesters outside were empty.
Byrd's nephew took issue with Texas Gov.