ome officials said 20 to 30 people were still missing.
aj. homas choenherr, an ustrian military spokesman, said rescuers in altuer had no way of making their way down the valley ednesday afternoon to help after the most recent avalanche in schgl, but that others had been flown in by helicopter.
hey were still looking for 20 to 30 other missing people, feared dead under the snow.
wo people, a man and a little girl, were pulled alive from the snow ednesday in schgl, but a woman was killed and six other people were believed missing, according to authorities and ustrian television.
e said 31 people were still missing in the village in the yrol province, near the wiss border.
  t least eight people have been confirmed killed and 30 others injured as two avalanches roared through a ski resort in ustria's western state of riol on uesday evening, the ustrian news media reported.
- t least eight people have been confirmed killed and 30 others injured as two avalanches roared through a ski resort in ustria's western state of riol on uesday evening, the ustrian news media reported.
n northwestern taly, a mass of snow and debris tore through the small village of orgex on uesday, killing a 52-year-old woman in her home and injuring three others.
- ne worker died and seven others were injured in a fire that broke out at a crude refinery about 20 miles east of an rancisco, a local official said uesday.
t least 30 people, some of them critically injured, were dug out by evening, ustrian television said.
aj. homas choenherr of the ustrian army, told ustrian radio on uesday evening that about 55 people were feared missing in altuer.
ome 20,000 tourists were stranded in yrol province, and thousands of others in orarlberg.
 _ t midday, the industrial average was up 19 points, or 0.2 percent, and the asdaq index was up 10 points, or 0.4 percent.
hree people were still missing as of uesday night.
 n avalanche crashed through a small ustrian resort on uesday, killing at least eight people and leaving dozens missing, in what officials feared could turn out to be ustria's worst snow disaster in years.
even miles away, in altuer, the death toll rose to 16, with 15 still missing.
even miles away, in altuer, the death toll rose to 16, with 15 still missing.
n ustria's western orarlberg province, rescuers near argellen found a man and a woman uesday who were buried a day earlier when an avalanche swallowed a mountain restaurant,  reported.
he village, which has no hospital, had been cut off from the outside world by heavy snows and high winds for nearly a week.
cores of other resorts in ustria, witzerland and rance have been cut off from road access for days by the mounting danger of avalanches.
ive people remained missing, the ustria ress gency said.
riving snow and deadly winds prevented emergency helicopters from flying into the ski village of altuer, near the wiss border, where local rescue workers spent the night digging through walls of snow and rubble for survivors.
ustrian army helicopters remained grounded in the town of andeck, about 20 miles from altuer, overnight.
ere in andeck, more than 20 miles east of altuer, ustrian authorities turned a military barracks compound into an avalanche-emergency command center for evacuating people from the stricken resorts and sending in food and other supplies.
ore than 60 people have died in avalanches in urope this year.
he new avalanche struck just miles from where rescuers were digging for victims of urope's worst snowslide this winter.
 _ valanche developments: he death toll has risen to 29 missing.
he confirmed death toll from uesday's avalanche at altuer stood at 10 early today, but was expected to rise, provincial governor endelin eingartner told reporters.
n witzerland, officials said the death toll over the weekend had risen to seven.
hey were being flown in by helicopter to the hospital in nearby andeck, where rescue operations were headquartered
  nother killer avalanche struck estern ustria today, striking just miles from where rescuers were digging for victims of urope's worst snowslide this winter.
"he peace talks ... are a significant step forward in the search for a fair and lasting peace in osovo," linton said in a statement issued by the hite ouse.
even miles away the death toll rose to 16 from an avalanche yesterday.
he latest torrent of snow smashed into the town of alzur, where a dead woman and three survivors were pulled from the snow and debris.
wiss television reported that as many as 60,000 people were snowbound in the resorts of avos and losters.
ome 20 people went missing while rescuers are continuing the searching work.
ome 20 people went missing while rescuers are continuing the searching work.
  nother killer avalanche brought new heartache to estern ustria today, striking just miles from where rescuers were digging for victims of urope's worst snowslide this winter.
 _ ew ork ity olice shoot another unarmed this time, the victim survives.
- resident ill linton called on uesday the partial peace agreement reached on osovo "a significant step forward" in the search for peace in osovo and urged the erbs and ethnic lbanians to sign a full peace deal next month.
he main road into altuer was blocked by an earlier avalanche.
he surprise announcement came a day after osovo peace talks concluded without any breakthrough on a deal to end a year of fighting in the southern erbian province.
  he new ouse speaker signaled today that epublicans might exceed spending limits enacted two years ago with resident linton, placing the  in the ticklish position of evading strictures aimed at shrinking government.
epublican leaders said they wanted the first enate bill passed this year to telegraph support for .. troops, particularly in light of a possible new deployment to osovo
he other was a 28-year-old local man.
 state spokesman said the heavy snow blocking the mountain roads makes it hard to get the nearly 10,000 besieged skiers out of the valley in a short time.
n the ski village of orgex, in northern taly, a 52-year-old woman was killed when her house collapsed under an avalanche before daylight.
ed ross sources said 30 people have been dug out with injures in various conditions.
here helicopters could fly, rescuers flew in food and tons of mail to entire valleys that had been cut off by heavy snow.
he fiercest snowstorms in 50 years set off massive avalanches all across the lps in recent weeks, killing dozens of residents and ski vacationers in rance, witzerland, taly and ustria.
ix remained missing, ustrian state radio said.
``ome 300 people are looking for buried people in the mass of snow,'' ufwig alter, a ski instructor, told the ustrian ress gency.
irefighters, tourists and residents joined in the search for survivors, some digging in the snow with their bare hands.
  elicopters rescued stranded tourists in western ustria and another killer avalanche brought new heartache today.
he nation has 1.4 million active-duty military members.
he nation has 1.4 million active-duty military members.
adonna won her first musical rammys.
nd the ``itanic'' ballad ``y eart ill o n'' won three rammys, including song of the year.
  resident linton said today the nited tates has an interest in resolving the osovo conflict.
 _ he weekly conomic cene column.
elivering the ed's semiannual economic report to ongress, reenspan said increasing the wage probably would push inflation higher.
 _ ed hairman reenspan completes his testimony, appearing today before the ouse anking panel.
o shots had been fired and no one was reported hurt, she said.
ith altuer and schgl cut off from road access ednesday by the continuing danger of avalanches, information on the latest deadly slide was scarce.
he latest torrent of snow smashed into the town of alzur, where two people were killed and two survivors were pulled from the snow and debris.
he latest torrent of snow smashed into the town of alzur, where two people were killed and two survivors were pulled from the snow and debris.
hree others in the house survived, but she was killed when a steel beam pierced her chest.
n western ustria alone, about 20,000 tourists have been unable to leave their hotels since last ednesday.
alter said that in some parts of the village, snow was 17 feet high.
he nited tates flew in six lackhawk medical evacuation helicopters to nnsbrueck airport, 60 miles northeast of altuer, to help take people out, but they could not fly in ednesday because of the afternoon snow, choenherr said.
ll three survived, climbing out of the house through a hole where the roof had been, and were flown out to an emergency center in andeck ednesday afternoon.
``e're doing everything humanly possible to rescue people,'' said ustrian army spokesman aj. homas choenherr in andeck.
nside the village, witnesses said the residents were digging for survivors.
ens of thousands of tourists were stranded in some of northern urope's most fashionable resorts.
n ednesday, 24 hours after the uesday avalanche, authorities said another snowslide, up to 45 feet deep and 600 feet wide, in the nearby resort of schgl had swept away four houses.
our of the 10 who were swept away were pulled out of the snowslide  shaken but alive  by rescuers.
he altuer avalanche was one of the worst to strike entral urope this winter as the region continues to endure its heaviest snowfall in 50 years.
1-- _  list of stories being considered by ew ork imes editors for age 1 will move at 4:30 p.m.
- _  description of the front page layout of the first edition of he ew ork imes will move at 7:30 p.m.
  ecretary of tate adeleine lbright told ongress today that there was ``zero chance'' that a peace plan for osovo could succeed without .. participation in a peacekeeping force.
osovo's ethnic lbanians, although tentatively agreeing to a peace accord yesterday in talks near aris, would back out of the deal without .. participation, lbright said in testimony to the enate oreign elations ommittee.
 issued a statement uesday, urging the warring sides of osovo to make most of their extra time to reach a comprehensive agreement when their talks resume on arch 15.
er hit song, ``oo op (hat hing)'' won best n song and best n vocal performance.
adonna won best pop album for her excursion into electronica, ``ay of ight.''
  ip-hop star auryn ill won four rammy wards tonight for her solo debut album, including best new artist.
  auryn ill's solo debut album ``he iseducation of auryn ill'' and the hit single ``oo op (hat hing)'' won the hip-hop star three rammys awards tonight.
he ``itanic'' ballad ``y eart ill o n'' won three, including song of the year, and adonna also won three.
he uropean nion () noted that the six-nation ontact roup on the former ugoslavia allowed the signing of agreement before arch 15, according to the statement issued by ermany, which is holding the rotating presidency of the .
  he enate voted overwhelmingly today to give the nation's military the biggest benefits increase since the early 1980s.
  he enate voted overwhelmingly today to give the nation's military a benefits increase.
   group headed by arry olan, a member of the family that owns ablevision, has offered $65 million to buy arge chott's controlling interest in the incinnati eds, he incinnati nquirer reported today.
, alif. )  he slumping os ngeles akers fired coach el arris today.
hania wain, tevie onder, the rian etzer rchestra were double winners.
  rant ill, im uncan, evin arnett, ary ayton, im ardaway, teve mith, om ugliotta, llan ouston and in aker have been chosen as the first nine members of the 2000 .. lympics team, he ssociated ress learned today.
hose nine plus three non- players yet to be selected will represent the nited tates in the mericas one qualifying tournament une 14-25 in an uan, uerto ico.
ut onstantine, testifying to the enate aucus on nternational arcotics ontrol, stopped short of saying exico should be decertified.
he statement by  dministrator homas onstantine comes just ahead of resident linton's expected certification of exico's counter-drug effort.
rs. linton met in the hite ouse family quarters today with ew ork en. harles chumer, ew ork ep. ita owey and ew ersey en. obert orricelli.
he vacationing skiers and those who cater to them live for now they are finding that they can also die from too much of it.
he tape showed solid three-story concrete and stucco yrolean houses torn apart as if by an earthquake, and automobiles rolled into crumpled metal balls by the snow.
  epublican fund-raisers seized on ``illary linton for enate'' as their own rallying cry today as the first lady, undecided about a candidacy, summoned advice-givers to the hite ouse family quarters.
rs. chwarz had a meal in the barracks mess hall after her ordeal and waited for her husband to come from ermany to pick up the family.
erry est, the team's vice president of basketball operations, said that one of two assistants  urt ambis or arry rew  will succeed arris for at least the rest of the season.
n rance, blizzards hampered rescuers seeking rench skiers and hikers missing in the lps and the yrenees.
  rant ill, im uncan, evin arnett, ary ayton, im ardaway, teve mith, om ugliotta, llan ouston and in aker have been chosen as the first nine members of the 2000 .. lympics team, he ssociated ress learned today.
he nited tates is regarded as the world leader in fixing the 2 problem, but the draft of a report being prepared by two senators who have been studying the issue, said the consequences within the country should not be underestimated either.
allace and his girlfriend, licia oice were rescued two hours after the roof of their chalet collapsed.
  harles g was convicted today of 11 counts of first-degree murder in a series of sex slavery killings dating back to 1984 and 1985.
g looked down at the defendants' table as the verdicts were read and showed no reaction.
erry est, the team's vice president of basketball operations, said that one of two assistants  urt ambis or arry rew  will handle the coaching duties for the rest of the season.
  hite supremacist ohn illiam ing, convicted of the dragging death of a black man, was capable of future acts of violence, a psychiatrist testified today.
  he ear 2000 computer problem could cause serious disruptions abroad, including breakdowns in nuclear reactors and strategic missile systems, midwinter power outages and disruptions in world trade and oil shipments, a  official warned today.
, alif. )  he os ngeles akers, mired at .500 12 games through the abbreviated  season, fired coach el arris today.
he 1978 statute is due to expire une 30.
n argument between the two men followed, and artell allegedly shot ajda in the head.
  harles g was convicted today of 11 counts of first-degree murder in a series of sex slavery killings dating to 1984 and 1985.
  roadcasters will sue the nation's largest satellite  company over its plans to continue providing  and ox programs beyond a court-ordered unday cutoff date.
ontvale lementary chool rincipal im atledge was taken hostage in his office shortly after 2 p.m., a spokeswoman for the school system said.
  n eighth-grade boy with a gun took his principal hostage this afternoon, apparently after the principal tried to discipline him for carrying the weapon in school.
ll four major broadcast networks  , ox,  and   and their affiliate organizations intend to seek a court order to block the satellite company, irect nc., from doing this, the ational ssociation of roadcasters announced today.
``e were drinking hot mulled wine, when suddenly it started'' ranz enko, a hotel operator in altuer, told ustrian television.
hose nine plus three non- players yet to be selected will represent the nited tates in the mericas one qualifying tournament une 14-25 in an uan, uerto ico.
 _ adbury chweppes records an indicated earnings increase, before gains from the sale of assets, of 4.5 percent for the second half and says it will use proceeds from its sale of brands to oca-ola to acquire beverage businesses in orth merica and candy businesses elsewhere.
  t times tearful, uanita roaddrick appeared on 's ``ateline'' tonight describing an alleged sexual assault by ill linton 21 years ago.
he treaty, adopted at the nited ations eneral ssembly on eptember 10 bans any nuclear test, restricts the upgrade of nuclear weaponry or the improvement of the nuclear weapons now in service.
ob erbert's ``n merica'' and illiam afire's ``ssay.''
 _ ompanies are racing to develop intraocular contact lenses, clear polymer arcs implanted in the eye, which could reach the market within the next two to three years.
- olish resident leksander wasniewski on uesday signed a law to ratify the omprehensive uclear est an reaty.
 _ egotiations collapsed early this morning over a proposed treaty to regulate international trade in genetically modified products.
 _ inancial watchdog groups says wiss and erman banks propped up the apartheid regime in outh frica.
he new products, essentially the world's first permanent contact lenses, are expected to eventually draw a large share of the $10 billion that mericans spend each year for glasses and contact lenses.
he hoto-raphics editor is eborah archand
 _ he inancial ccounting tandards oard discusses whether to issue a new accounting proposal that would wipe out instant write-offs for the value of as-yet-undeveloped products _ so-called in-process research and development _ picked up in an acquisition.
 _ n aging ussian plane used by hina airline crashes in southern hina, killing 60.
he police say the man, a transit worker, threatened their lives.
  he first day of the inaugural atch lay hampionship was everything it was advertised to be today  and stunning results sent some of the best players packing.
 _ he iuliani administration begins the latest in its quality-of-life campaigns, to curtail unleashed dogs in the city's parks, using such measures as increased fines and citizen patrols.
 _ .. experts talk about avalanche control.
ut the nited tates, together with ustralia, anada, ruguay, rgentina and hile, refused to accept the proposal, insisting on a more narrowly focused treaty that would have had a minimal impact on trade in the goods.
 _ he - launches a drive for its next big goal: equal pay.
ts stock falls, apparently because investors are disappointed that the company did not announce a buyback plan.
 _ rguments before court on a seeming catch-22 facing the disabled: a disabled person who filed for disability payments from ocial ecurity has been blocked from filing a workplace discrimination suit.
 _ he edicare commission meets for one of its last sessions, recommends prescription drug coverage and foresees significant savings from higher premiums and a bigger role for private 's.
he shooting highlighted the tensions before riday's polls, which pit supporters of reformist resident ohammad hatami against his hard-line rivals in the slamic government.
   gunman opened fire on a moderate party's election headquarters today as reformers and hard-liners bickered over candidates in ran's first local elections in 20 years.
alf of the top 64 players in the world won't get another chance this week to play for the $1 million first prize  including ark 'eara, avis ove, olin ontgomerie and rnie ls.
linton, who was attorney general of rkansas in 1978, refused comment earlier today on rs. roaddrick's allegations, saying he stood by the statement of his attorney, avid endall, who called the accusations ``absolutely false.''
e breezed to a 4 and 3 victory over ick aldo.
 _ ne-fourth of the $13 billion that oeing is investing in its product lines will produce no meaningful returns, according to a study by the company that paves the way for an overhaul of its operations.
n the interview, taped an. 20 but held by the network until tonight, rs. roaddrick cried briefly as she detailed the alleged assault.
heir ranks swelled to 537 last year, up from 474 in 1997, the center said in its annual ntelligence roject report.
he late supervisor is am eiss (-mail, saweis(at)nytimes.com).
he evening supervisor is at yan (-mail, patryan(at)nytimes.com).
he day supervisor is ary . cardell (-mail, garymc(at)nytimes.com).
  apanese stock prices advanced hursday.
  apanese stock prices advanced hursday.
n ew ork ednesday, the ow ones industrial average closed down 144.75 at 9,399.67.
he ow ones industrial average closed down 144.75 at 9,399.67.
n ew ork ednesday, the ow ones industrial average closed down 144.75 at 9,399.67.
``he nited tates does have a direct interest in whether there is instability in the alkans,'' linton said.
he jury also found special circumstances of multiple murder that make g, a 38-year-old from ong ong, eligible for the death penalty, to be determined in a separate penalty phase of the trial.
ighways were blocked or traffic was backed up for hours.
he said of linton, ``my hatred for him is overwhelming.''
ouses, railroads and highways were buried by avalanches.
olice said he encountered 56-year-old anos ajda, who was believed to be the wife's new boyfriend.
he snow wall, five meters high and 800 meters long, tore through 10 houses and buried 50 people.
or black women, the doctors were only 40 percent as likely to order catheterization.
he refinery has been operated by osco orp. and a company spokesman said the fire was put out by the company's own emergency workers by 12:30.
 35-year-old erman woman was killed when a snowslide ploughed into a chalet in portsgastein, near alzburg, ustria.
ince last weekend, though, it had been snowing too hard to ski.
n witzerland, teams of rescue workers searching for survivors found five more bodies on uesday, after an avalanche that crushed chalets near volene on unday.
e said that soon after daybreak, about a dozen helicopters ferried some 200 troops to the avalanche site and also carried some of the injured back to hospitals in andeck, 25 miles away.
fter heavy snows over the past two weeks set off avalanches that killed seven people near the southern wiss village of volene and 19 people in rance, the mood ednesday at the height of this lpine vacation season is edgy.
escue workers have recovered at least 17 injured, seven of whom required intensive care.
e said the nited tates, ermany and witzerland had all offered to lend helicopters to the rescue efforts, and officials were evaluating how best to use them.
andeck and altuer are separated by mountains more than 8,000 to 10,000 feet high, fearsome, jagged peaks that, from the air ednesday, looked softened and benign under their heavy coats of blinding white snow.
laces like avos, witzerland, where the high and mighty of the worlds of government, industry and finance congregated at a conference early this month, are now inaccessible by road or rail, and others, like the fashionable ustrian resorts of ech and uers, another 60 miles west of here, have been cut off for more than a week.
ens of thousands of travelers were stranded in train stations, traffic jams and isolated resort towns across rance, taly witzerland and ustria as the avalanches buried homes, roads and railways.
ight seriously injured victims were flown to hospitals in nnsbrueck, where they were all said to be in stable condition under treatment for hypothermia.
uthorities here said ednesday that they had recovered the bodies of 16 people, many of them erman vacationers, from the avalanche, which was 15 to 20 feet deep and 300 to 500 feet wide.
   new avalanche 45-feet deep thundered down the mountainside outside the stricken village of altuer today, burying 10 people in its path, the ustria ress gency reported.
ll told, the avalanches were the worst in ustria since a series of snowslides killed 56 people in the village of lons in anuary 1954.
ere are today's top news stories from he ew ork imes ews ervice for s of hursday, eb. 25.
`'t was more like a alifornia earthquake.''
 _ ecretary lbright testifies before ongress on osovo and other matters.
he bill, the first passed by the eante this year, now goes to the ouse.
 _ n 's first major post-impeachment bill, the enate is expected today to approve a pay raise and new pension program for troops, a measure the oint hiefs say is essential to stem the alarming decline in recruiting and retaining top-caliber soldiers.
 _ ur look at the new speaker of the ouse in the first week of a new less-powerful speakership, with more power in the hands of committee chairmen.
ome top epublican aides went further, saying that in private consultations, the ouse  seemed to be moving toward surpassing the spending limits for fiscal 2000 by billions of dollars.
is statement came after the ontact roup, composed of ritain, rance, ermany, taly, ussia and the nited tates, announced that an agreement had been reached on substantial autonomy for osovo and a conference on implementing the accord would be held in rance beginning on arch 15.
 advancers led decliners 1,561-1,229.
 decliners led advancers 1,782-1,202.
  tocks closed lower today after bond prices slid and pushed interest rates higher.
he legislation includes an across-the-board 4.8 percent pay increase with further boosts in future years.
he legislation includes an across-the-board 4.8 percent pay increase with further boosts in future years.
hey increased 0.9 percent in rankfurt and 1.9 percent in ondon.
  ust before 2 p.m. , the ow industrials were up 50.91 to 9,595.33.
  he nternet is to blame for a dramatic increase in the number of hate groups operating in the nited tates, the outhern overty aw enter said.
  aising the minimum wage could deny some teen-agers their chance at entry-level jobs, ederal eserve hairman lan reenspan said today.
 _ he daily marketplace column.
he court ruled that children born in hina to ong ong parents had a right to live in the territory.
 _ evelopments as linton has a press conference with resident of hana.
he jury that found ing guilty yesterday of kidnapping and murdering ames yrd r. last une must agree with r. dward ripon in order to sentence ing to death.
- entral merican foreign ministers will meet here on riday to prepare for a summit meeting of regional heads of state with .. resident ill linton.
linton will come to icaragua on arch 8 on the first stage of his entral merican tour, which will also take him to uatemala and onduras.
``his is the most painful day of my life,'' said endelin eingartner, the top elected official in the ustrian yrol region.
 _ evelopments at the icrosoft antitrust trial.
 _ evelopments: lbanian delegation to return today.
impson, reached at home, said he was prepared to face another trial against his ex-wife's parents.
he snow wall, 5 meters high and 800 meters long, tore through ten houses and buried 50 people.
``t's a terrible day for yrol,'' eingartner said uesday.
 doctor, who is believed to be the only one in the village, told an  reporter by telephone, ``e are working in very basic conditions.''
escuers in volene, witzerland, found five more bodies uesday from avalanches on unday.
ver the border in the wiss state of alais, avalanches thundered down repeatedly into a mountain valley uesday, propelled by fresh snow and winds gusting up to 95 mph.
hildren, some of whom had been playing in the streets when the snow rumbled over them, were among the dead.
n the ground, olive drab ustrian uey helicopters beat their way down into the narrow landing field of the andeck barracks compound for most of the day, taking out about 400 vacationers and villagers before a heavy snowfall late ednesday afternoon halted the flights.
o rs. chwarz, her daughter, olvieg, and her son, hristoph, were relaxing in bed on the third floor of their bed-and-breakfast chalet in the center of altuer at 4 p.m. uesday when, with an almighty rumbling, clouds of snow blasted through the windows and the whole house collapsed beneath them.
, ustria _ ith more snow covering the lps than almost anyone could remember, lrike chwarz came to the ustrian lpine resort of altuer from her home in ermany last week with her two teen-age children, expecting the best skiing in years.
choenherr said that people caught in the open by the slide had little chance of surviving more than a few minutes but those trapped in their homes, where they had air to breathe, had a chance of surviving considerably longer.
``es, but not with this much snow,'' rs. chwarz said.
``here's no let-up,'' he said, referring to the rescue effort.
our of the victims _ one a child _ were rench tourists.
  ustrian soldiers took advantage of a break in heavy snowfall today to mount a rescue of avalanche victims from a stricken lpine town, joining villagers who dug with their bare hands in a frantic effort to reach those buried below.
-- _ tories scheduled for age 1 will be listed by 7 p.m.
-- _  rundown of culture, lifestyle, sports, and special section stories will move by 3:00 p.m.
he team made the announcement as it was adding ennis odman to what on paper is one of the more talented teams in the league.
ill, who led with 10 nominations in nine categories, won best rhythm and blues album for ``he iseducation of auryn ill.''
 _ ongress holds hearings on the independent counsel act.
resident linton, meanwhile, declined to comment on the issue but told reporters that hite ouse lawyers will testify on the matter next week.
he erbian authority and the ethnic lbanians failed to sign on any agreement by the deadline on 1400  uesday after their 17 days of negotiations.
resident linton, in his tate of the nion address last month, proposed raising the wage by $1 to $6.15 by eptember 2000.
he labor federation will seek legislation in 20 states and resurrect the idea of comparable worth as a standard for comparing pay levels.
he asdaq was higher most of the day but ended 36.95 lower at 2,339.40.
hey were flat in razil and up 0.4 percent in exico.
   top rug nforcement dministration official said today the exican narcotics cartels' penetration of the nited tates has increased dramatically.
`` would argue we have a humanitarian interest,'' he said.
n the merican debt market, the long bond was down 1/32 point, with the yield at 5.43 percent.
he ikkei tock verage rose 88.04 points to 14,443.49 points in early trading.
he ikkei tock verage rose 88.04 points to 14,443.49 points in early trading.
lsewhere, prices fell 1 percent in okyo and rose 2.6 percent in ong ong.
hether she does or doesn't, the sheer specter of a run by rs. linton is enough to galvanize epublican donors, said entucky en. itch connell, chairman of the ational epublican enatorial ommittee.
he jury also found special circumstances of multiple murder that make g eligible for the death penalty, to be determined in a separate penalty phase of the trial.
he summit meeting was slated for arch 12 in uatemala and the participating heads of state will examine questions of regional interest, said icaraguan oreign inister duardo ontealegre.
r. ames artell, a 25-year veteran of oly amily ospital, went to see his wife, uzan amm, in the hospital yesterday.
()   respected plastic surgeon was accused of shooting his estranged wife's boyfriend to death during a visit to the wife's hospital room.
impson's appeal for custody of his two children today, and he faces a new custody trial that would include evidence on whether he killed their mother.
uropean authorities explained the spate of avalanches by the almost unparalleled amounts of snow that have fallen since the second week of ebruary and the high winds that have whipped it into drifts and made it unstable on the crust of earlier snow.
  ubconscious prejudices among doctors may help explain why women and blacks complaining of chest pain are less likely than men and whites to receive the best cardiac testing, a study suggests.
 new study of 720 physicians found that, with all symptoms being equal, doctors were only 60 percent as likely to order cardiac catheterization for women and blacks as for men and whites.
he fire broke out at 12:18 in the early afternoon at the refinery located in ontra osta ounty east of an rancisco.
  irginia is making criminals out of flagrant junk e-mailers with a new law to protect computer users from getting ``spammed.''
n altuer, a town of 700 year-round inhabitants and about 3,000 tourists in yrol rovince's aznaun alley, the avalanche thundered though the heart of town near the village church at 4:00 p.m. instantly crushing four houses.
oth avalanches rushed down the lps to the altuer resort nestling in the aznauntal valley after 4 p.m. local time (1500 ).
oth avalanches rushed down the lps to the altuer resort nestling in the aznauntal valley after 4 pm (1500).
ould she or her children ever go skiing again?
he recent avalanches, labeled by some newspapers as ``the white death,'' were described as the largest and most terrifying in recent memory.
itnesses said there were no casualties in the attack, in which a passenger on a motor scooter sprayed bullets.
ust hours earlier, ustrian soldiers had taken advantage of a break in heavy snowfall to search for victims of yesterday's avalanche in the lpine town  relieving villagers who dug with bare hands to reach the missing.
lease note that your ew ork imes ews ervice report includes news and features from he rizona epublic, loomberg ews, he oston lobe, ox ews ervice, he ort orth tar-elegram, earst ewspapers, he ouston hronicle, he ansas ity tar, he os ngeles aily ews, he an rancisco hronicle, he eattle ost-ntelligencer, tates ews ervice and the ew ork imes egional ewspapers.
he treaty will go into effect 180 days after the ratification of all the 44 countries known to have nuclear reactors, including oland.
he newspaper, citing unidentified sources, said olan's group made the offer for 5 1/2 of chott's 6 1/2 shares, or about one-third of the ballclub.
  ongress should just let the independent counsel law expire since almost any effort to revise it so soon after resident linton's impeachment acquittal ``is likely to be a mistake,'' former hite ouse chief of staff oward aker told a enate committee today.
linton is considering sending up to 4,000 .. troops as part of a 28,000-strong  force that would go to osovo for at least three years if a peace plan were implemented.
e got out of there as fast as we could.''
 _  news analysis: hy things didn't work out for the .. in the osovo talks.
he uropean nion countries and more than 110 other nations reached a consensus late uesday on a iosafety rotocol.
he announcement spelled success for a long-term merican and uropean goal  getting ethnic lbanians to speak with one voice.
``he nternet is allowing the white supremacy movement to reach places it has never reached before  middle- and upper-middle class, college-bound teens,'' said ark otok, a researcher for the center.
he asdaq index was up 27.74 to 2,404.09.
 _ oping to quell a bitter legal row with mainland hina, ong ong's government today filed a motion asking its high court to clarify a landmark immigration ruling that provoked objections from eijing.
hey barred all civilian air or road traffic in the area.
  osovo's rival ethnic lbanian factions today formed a coalition to push harder to secede from erbia.
he court unanimously denied review of a lower-court ruling that set aside a judge's order giving impson legal custody of his daughter ydney and son, ustin, 10.
`''ve seen many avalanches, but not the type that come into your house and blow it away,'' said athan allace from ammoth akes, alif., whose chalet near hamonix was destroyed by an avalanche on eb. 9.
nother government spokesman said that only ``a few'' were unaccounted for.
he legislation passed yesterday makes irginia the fourth state in the country to pass an anti-spamming law and 18 others are considering them, said the ational onference of tate egislatures.
o much snow had fallen over the last week that the ustrian otoring ssociation complained that its density monitors had been buried, making it impossible to measure the snow fall.
nd it showed rescuers lifting frozen bodies out of the ice.
he man was still alive, but bad weather prevented an emergency flight to a hospital, and he died later of his injuries.
n many parts of urope, driving snow caused trains to be canceled.
et almost all the resorts have eb sites or television advertisements that boast of fantastic ski conditions, and most are clearly expecting a new infusion of guests as soon as the roads reopen.
now fell heavily overnight, and the news agency reported that another 20 inches were expected by ednesday morning.
choenherr said, ``e will meet again at 6 a.m. to assess what we can do.''
``'m not saying we're going to bust them or not bust them,'' peaker ennis astert, -ll., told reporters.
rs. chwarz screamed, pushing the children toward the stairs in the back of the yrolean chalet, away from millions of tons of highly compressed snow carrying rocks and shredded trees and roaring down upon the village.
ther choppers loaded up with meat, cabbage, potatoes, tomatoes and milk for the 7,500 tourists in schgl and the 600 ski vacationers still in altuer.
e spoke to the overnmental ffairs ommittee at its opening hearing on whether to renew, rewrite or let the law die.
ustrian television showed video tape, apparently taken by the rescuers, showing dogs sniffing for survivors and long lines of rescuers plunging sticks into the snow and digging holes 6-to-10 feet deep in hopes of finding victims still alive.
ll over urope, the avalanches took lives and destroyed homes.
he move was announced while ennis odman was participating in his first practice session with the team after signing a contract yesterday.
  he alifornia upreme ourt rejected ..
ike irginia, alifornia's law allows for the jailing of some spammers while laws in ashington and evada impose civil fines.
``he snow is like cement and it's full of pieces of wood and wreckage,'' choenherr said.