rizzly bears in and around ellowstone ational ark should be removed from the endangered species list after 30 years of federal protection, the .. epartment of nterior said uesday.
ish and ildlife ervice is preparing to remove ellowstone's grizzly bears from the endangered species list later this year.
rizzly bears in areas surrounding ellowstone ational ark would be removed from the endangered species list under a proposal to be announced next week, officials said.
ish and ildlife ervice is poised to remove the park's renowned bears from the endangered species list.
ederal wildlife officials estimate that more than 600 grizzly bears live in the region surrounding ellowstone in daho, ontana and yoming.
ederal wildlife officials estimate that more than 600 grizzly bears now live in the region, which includes parts of yoming, ontana and daho.
he number of grizzlies in the ellowstone area has grown at a rate of 4 to 7 percent per year since the bear was listed under the ndangered pecies ct in 1975, nterior ecretary ale orton said.
nd removing protection, they say, would not allow the federal ish and ildlife ervice to halt development in a crucial grizzly habitat.
he ellowstone grizzly bear, one of the first and most controversial animals to be protected by the ndangered pecies ct, is fully recovered, and it is time to remove the stringent safeguards it has had for nearly three decades, federal officials said on uesday.
f the grizzlies are removed from the list, the three states would assume management responsibilities from federal wildlife officials and have greater flexibility in dealing with bears.
f the administration goes ahead with taking ellowstone's grizzlies off the list, it will become the 18th endangered species to recover under the ndangered pecies ct.
ish and ildlife ervice in ontana to nterior epartment headquarters, said hris ervheen, grizzly bear recovery coordinator for ish and ildlife.
ederal grizzly bear biologists in ontana say that years of research shows that the bear population around ellowstone is robust and recovered.
ow their population is estimated to be about 600, and growing about 4 to 7 percent a year, according to the ish and ildlife ervice.
hris ervheen, grizzly bear recovery coordinator for the ish and ildlife ervice, said he also supported taking bears off the list.
he federal official most alarmed about the recent spike in illegal bear killings is hris ervheen, grizzly-bear recovery coordinator for ish and ildlife.
"he ellowstone grizzly is the ndangered pecies ct's best recovery story," said hris ervheen, a niversity of ontana professor and head of the federal agency's grizzly bear recovery team.
iven this political reality, officials from the ational ildlife ederation say they have concluded that the long effort to rescue grizzlies in and around ellowstone ational ark should be publicized for what it is: a resounding success and a perfect example of how the ndangered pecies ct can work.
he ational ildlife ederation supports delisting, saying it highlights the success of the endangered species law.
he administration wants to reform the ndangered pecies ct to make it harder to add to the list and easier to remove species from it.
he 5-year-old male was the first of 19 grizzly bears to die in the region surrounding ellowstone ational ark and one of 50 killed in the lower 48 states, making 2004 the worst year for grizzly mortality since the animal was added to the endangered species list in 1975.
hile the state plans to allow hunting ``as a management tool,'' he added, officials would ensure it does not hurt the grizzly population, and hunting would not begin for at least a year.
nce ndangered pecies ct protections are removed, a host of new safeguards will ensure grizzly populations will not decline, ervheen said.
tate and federal agencies will monitor the bears and their habitat and responsibility for managing bears will be turned over to ontana, daho and yoming.
raig anson, assistant secretary for fish and wildlife and parks at the nterior epartment, said the agency considers ellowstone's grizzly population, which has rebounded from a low of roughly 200 in 1982 to more than 600 today, ``recovered.''
nly 200 or 250 grizzlies were in that region in 1975, when grizzly bears in the lower 48 states were listed under the ndangered pecies ct.
ut other powerful organizations, including the ierra lub, the atural esources efense ouncil and arthjustice, are threatening to sue the ush administration if, as expected, it removes ellowstone grizzlies from the list.
he ellowstone contingent is the largest of a handful of remnant grizzly populations in the lower 48 states and the only one facing imminent removal from the endangered species list.
he ush administration on uesday is to take the first step toward removing ellowstone's grizzly bears, a living icon of the merican est, from the nation's endangered species list.
nd it comes at a delicate moment in the politics of environmentalism, with the ush administration poised, despite the objections of many conservation groups, to remove grizzlies farther south in ellowstone ational ark from the endangered species list.
ccording to estimates at the time, there were between 150 and 220 ellowstone grizzlies when they were placed on the endangered species list.
om rance, regional director for the ational ildlife ederation, said his organization believes removing bears from federal protection in the ellowstone area is long overdue.
wenty-one grizzlies have been illegally killed here in northwest ontana in the past two years, a record pace for poaching since the bears were listed 30 years ago as threatened under the ndangered pecies ct, according to the ..
s the ush administration prepares to remove ellowstone's grizzly bears from the endangered species list, a schism has emerged in the environmental movement over whether the bears remain at risk.
he government would continue to monitor how state and federal authorities manage the land where the bears live to ensure their survival.
uch has changed in the mountains and forested valleys of the ellowstone region since the bears were placed on the endangered species.
f bear numbers drop, the population could be returned to the endangered species list, ervheen added.
our other grizzly populations in the lower 48 states will continue to be protected as threatened species under the act.
''he only way the bear is going to survive in the ellowstone cosystem is to have public support for it.
ervheen of the ish and ildlife ervice who is a strong advocate of delisting the ellowstone grizzlies dismissed the resolutions as ''colorful but meaningless,`` saying that ''a majority of people want bears around.``
he job of managing an unlisted bear would fall to state wildlife agencies and the ark ervice.
he only other large population of grizzlies in the nited tates is in and around lacier ational ark.
hile the ational ildlife ederation is backing the delisting of the grizzly bear, other environmental groups including the ierra lub and the atural esource efense ouncil are opposed and threaten to sue the federal government to block the move.
rance said ontana, yoming and daho  working with federal agencies  are well prepared to guarantee the long-term health of ellowstone's grizzlies.
``e know more about this population of grizzly bears than any population of grizzly bears anywhere,'' anson said, adding the department will monitor the animals' health for five years after they come off the list.
"his has been a very long process," nterior ecretary ale . orton said after the department announced it would publish a proposed delisting of the animal in the ederal egister on hursday.
hile the plans are in various stages of development, the states are expected to authorize grizzly hunting for the fist time in decades, although it would not be allowed in the national parks.
hen grizzlies were listed as threatened in 1975, there were about 200 to 250 of them in the ellowstone area.
he bears range over nearly 9 million acres in and around the national park, she said, but the administration's proposal only covers a six million-acre habitat.
he proposal to de-list grizzly bears in the area surrounding ellowstone ational ark, which has alarmed some environmentalists, highlights the contrasting views of the 32-year-old ndangered pecies ct.
" lot of trees are going to be killed," said ohn chwandt, national whitebark pine coordinator for the orest ervice.
or example, new roads will be banned in national forests around the park, ervheen said.
orton said grizzly bear recovery has been a success story because of cooperation between state and federal governments, along with biologists and conservation groups.
ish and ildlife ervice declined to comment on the proposal, but a congressional official and a state government official who were each informed of the announcement confirmed the government's plan.
``f we don't, we play right into the hands of the people who are trying to kill the ndangered pecies ct by reforming it.''
f the administration goes ahead with dropping the bears' current ``threatened'' status  a move that would not take place until the end of 2006 at the earliest  officials in daho, ontana and yoming would be free to allow limited hunting of grizzlies and would not have to maintain the same level of protection on the grizzlies' habitat.
heir range encompasses ellowstone, rand eton ational ark and nearby lands in yoming, ontana and daho.
ut ational ildlife ederation senior wildlife biologist terling iller, who spent 21 years studying grizzlies in laska, said the time has come to take ellowstone's bears off the list.
f adopted, the proposal would apply only to bears outside ellowstone and rand eton national parks.
he delisting is supported by the ational ildlife ederation, the nation's largest conservation group.
"e're not saying things will always be stable," said ervheen.
``t makes people who have information on the kills not want to come forward,'' omenici said.
rizzly bears in ellowstone ational ark can weigh up to 600 pounds.
espite the record number of dead bears last year, the ish and ildlife ervice believes the grizzlies, whose population has more than doubled in the three decades it has been on the list, no longer need the special protection afforded by the law.
rizzly habitat is being threatened by development, and the bears' food sources also are at risk, she said.
hat has happened with the grizzlies is a model for how to take an animal off the list.''
he number of bears has gone from a low of between 200 and 300 in the 1970s to more than 600 in the wild landscape that has ellowstone ational ark at its core.
 draft proposal to take the grizzlies off the endangered species list went out this summer from field offices of the ..
he attack on the whitebarks  by urasian blister rust and the mountain pine beetle  comes at the same time the ..
n overall decline of more than 4 percent or a 1.2 percent annual drop in the female population will trigger a review, ervheen said, and that could lead to an emergency re-lisiting.
``e're victims of our own success,'' said hris ervheen, ish and ildlife's grizzly bear coordinator.
ut ervheen stresses the bears will be monitored closely after they are delisted.
ho's killing the great bears of ontana?
o coax local residents to provide leads, ish and ildlife is about to offer rewards of between $1,000 and $5,000 for information leading to successful prosecution of individuals who illegally kill grizzlies, omenici said, but the service has not yet decided on a reward amount.
o one questions that ellowstone's grizzlies have rebounded over the past three decades since they were listed  the population has been growing at a rate of 4 to 7 percent a year for several years  in part because state and federal officials abolished trash dumps that used to lure bears and bring them into dangerous contact with humans.
hese three states would assume management responsibilities from federal wildlife officials and have greater flexibility in dealing with the animals.
ederal bear biologists contend the rust is moving more slowly in ellowstone than in northwest ontana and that the trees have co-evolved with mountain pine beetles for thousands of years.
"e're now seeing more than 40 sows with cubs," rance said.
ome environmentalists say the bears still do not have adequate protections to ensure their long-term success.
e added that federal biologists have informed him ``adequate habitat and adequate habitat protections are in place'' for the bears.
" lot of the seeds that grizzly bears really like are going to be greatly reduced, and not over decades but in the next 10 years," chwandt said.
t is considered likely that the states would allow the animal to be hunted, but in terms of management, orton said, "the reality is there's very little change. "
''n some ways  see hunting of grizzly bears in the future as positive tool,`` said im arber, the .. orest ervice's grizzly bear and wolf coordinator for the ocky ountain region.
``e think we should embrace success when it happens,'' said terling . iller, a grizzly bear specialist and senior wildlife biologist here in the federation's orthern ockies office.
efore delisting can occur, state and federal agencies in yoming, ontana and daho must establish bear management plans.
ealing with bears near the recovery zone boundary will be the toughest challenge for state and federal biologists, chwartz said.
ther conservation groups, however, including the ierra lub and the atural esources efense ouncil, oppose delisting.
``e would love to see the grizzly bear de-listed, but it's not ready,'' ilcox said, adding that one-third of the bears' current habitat could be opened to drilling, logging and human development.
he nterior epartment and the ..
he atural esources efense ouncil, the ierra lub and other groups say that too many threats still exist for the bears.
laskan grizzly bears, which number around 30,000, were never listed under the act.
ears that refused to return to a natural regimen were shot, and from 1969 to 1971, the ark ervice killed more than 200 bears, reducing them to perilously low levels and resulting in their listing as a threatened species.
 formidable symbol of merican wilderness, and a hugely popular public attraction in ellowstone, the grizzly bear would be the biggest animal to come off the endangered species list since the alifornia gray whale was delisted in 1994.
ore people live here because they want to look at the scenery or play in the out-of-doors  not because they want to work out there.
ominic omenici, the ish and ildlife ervice resident agent in charge of enforcement for ontana and yoming, said there ``are more conflicts now between elk hunters and bears,'' in part because the whitebark pine seeds grizzlies need are in shorter supply now due to a beetle infestation induced by warming climate.
"y experience is that the things happening in ellowstone are things we really have no control over," said ave attson, a .. eologic urvey research biologist.
tripping the bears of protection could eventually clear the way for hunting of grizzlies in that region.
n ellowstone ark, about 30 people have been injured and two killed in bear attacks since 1975.
``he public should understand that the ndangered pecies ct is not an overnight cure,'' said homas . rance, director and counsel for the federation's orthern ockies office.
ut about 2 million acres of federal and private land where about one-third of the bears are believed to live will be more open to logging, recreation and development.
ven if the ellowstone grizzlies are delisted, federal and state officials point out that protections will remain in place on more than 9,200 square miles of the grizzlies' core habitat in the parks and adjacent federal lands.
hey contend that once exempt from the highest level of federal protection, the bears will be safe only inside ellowstone and rand eton national parks, areas too small to sustain a viable population of grizzlies.
ears within the parks would remain federally protected.
he nation's largest environmental group, the ational ildlife ederation, supports delisting the bears, whose numbers have bounced back impressively after three decades of federal protection.
ut ouisa ilcox, who directs the atural esources efense ouncil's wild bears project, said de-listing would jeopardize the grizzlies' critical habitat.
ederal managers contend the bears eat just about anything around ellowstone, including grasses, roots, ants, miller moths, trout and elk.
ike olesky, a policy adviser to ontana ov.
his summer, om eed, a former yoming ame and ish spokesman, rode horseback through dead whitebark stands in ellowstone that were healthy just three years ago.
iven a chance, the bears will even eat the trash.
here are already fewer native cutthroat trout swimming up spawning streams, where bears hunt them, because they're being gobbled up in ellowstone ake by illegally introduced lake trout.
hat means if grizzly deaths spike, it could tip the species into an "extinction vortex," said ichael cott, director of the reater ellowstone oalition.
 leader of the group, avid urgert, a former snowmobile salesman now in prison, was a sometime caller to -600 talk radio, a alispell station owned by ohn tokes.
``hat's a prescription for a permanent listing.''
t plotted, rather feebly, to assassinate local officials and then go to war with the ational uard and .
ffluent outsiders have overrun lathead ounty in the past 15 years, fueling 37 percent population growth and creating a service-based economy that needs grizzlies as toothsome symbols of an eco-friendly western lifestyle.
oday, when a grizzly fords a stream to forage, it can find itself confronted with an obstacle course of swing sets and patio furniture.
``he government's doggedness in protecting the grizzlies has brought on tremendous polarization and anger in our community,'' said red odgeboom, president of ontanans for ultiple se, a local group that advocates increased logging, mining and grazing on federal land.
art of the reason, they say, is the hugeness and remoteness of the crime scene, which is nearly the size of witzerland and just as mountainous.
ast month, commissioners in remont ounty, southeast of ellowstone declared the bears ``socially unacceptable.''
``entiment against the bears and the government is the biggest handicap to investigation.''
lathead ounty is part of a slice of western ontana that is rapidly getting richer, better educated and more crowded, even as it turns away from the state's traditional reliance on resource extraction industries.
etirement money and revenue from stock investments now dwarfs, by more than 3 to 1, the combined earnings of timber, mining, farming and oil drilling, according to a recent study.
ich newcomers build palatial homes on steep mountain slopes (many in areas thick with grizzlies), frequent organic dry cleaners and insist on fresh seafood at pricey restaurants.
ut the lathead alley also incubates far right-wing militants, many of whom are angry about how this once-remote corner of ontana has tarted itself up as part of the ew est, while leaving them behind.
 large weapons cache was found near here three years ago, property of a citizen's militia group called roject 7.
ractices adopted in the late 1980s, such as more fenced areas, eliminating human garbage and relocating bruins that have become accustomed to people are believed to have helped.
tokes presides over a splenetic midday show in which he and his callers rail against exican immigrants, socialism and the sins of the federal government.
ea turtles (hawksbill, green, loggerhead)
fficials from several environmental organizations, however, said they do not trust the hite ouse to follow through.
et the tiny seeds  embedded in neat, brown cones  can make up more than half of a grizzly's pre-hibernation diet, one anadian ournal of oology study shows.
he whitebark pine nut weighs in at a thin fraction of an ounce.
oraging on the edge of the park is dangerous for bears because that's where people live.
n an interview about the recent rise in bear killings, tokes said that his listeners certainly are not anti-grizzly, but they are justifiably furious about bear-protection rules that for years have closed roads in federal forests.
``he recovery has been a huge success, but removing federal protection now is too risky,'' said eidi odwin, regional representative for the ierra lub in ontana.
he death rate here, where the grizzly population is estimated at 600, was 2 1/2 half times greater than the 15-year average.
rizzlies now frequent areas where they had not been seen for at least two decades.
ven with the strict protections now afforded by the ndangered pecies ct, grizzlies can be destroyed if they kill domestic livestock or make a nuisance of themselves in areas where people live.
hese bears live in the same three states and ashington.
nce the proposal is announced, there would be a period of public comment, and it could be months before a final decision is made.
he nterior epartment plans to issue a decision after a 90-day public comment period.
enior officials at nterior are reviewing the plan, ervheen said.
he new plans don't allow for a fallback when food sources in bear habitat diminish or change, said ilcox who has worked for conservation causes in yoming and ontana for more than 20 years.
``eople will see in time the states will do a good job with de-listing the grizzly bears,'' mmerich said.
``t doesn't take very many people who want to kill bears to really make a big difference.''
he grizzly bear recovery zone in what is called the orthern ontinental ivide cosystem now covers 8 million acres.
hat concerns ouisa illcox, who heads the ontana-based ild ear roject for the atural esources efense ouncil.
"he agencies are in a state of denial about what's happening on the landscape," said ouisa illcox, of the atural esources efense ouncil.
he study was supported by business and environmental groups, as well as the federal and provincial governments.
hose numbers represent a significant recovery.
" am very fearful about the future of the whitebark pine."
hitebark pines across the est are getting clobbered by an alien fungus and native beetle.
ome whitebarks have genetic resistance to blister rust.
hitebarks, however, have no defense against the invading mountain pine beetles, which have exploded into ellowstone.
any experts believed it would have been a major step in assuring the long-term survival of grizzlies because the isolated ellowstone bears would have been able to intermingle with the introduced population.
"e need to show that with cooperation, this law can work," ervheen said.
ears are spilling out into the wl reek ountains, the southern ind iver ange and places where they haven't been in 80 years, bear researchers say.
bout 24 percent of ellowstone area whitebarks were found to be infected with rust in a 2004 orest ervice survey.
rizzlies are thriving in laska, where more than 30,000 of them live.
``e're going to have an excellent picture of the health of this population well into the future.''
hey see protection of the bears as part of a loathsome ew orld rder that is closing roads in federal forests and marginalizing their lives.
he public will have 90 days to comment on the proposal.
"e have reached all of the recovery targets and exceeded them for a number of years," said homas . rance, head of the organization's orthern ockies office, in issoula, ont.
mall populations of bears live in the elkirk ountains of daho, the abinet ountains of ontana and the ascades of northwest ashington.
"t's probably one of the most studied mammals in the world," said huck chwartz, head of the nteragency rizzly ear tudy eam, in ozeman, ont., which has primary responsibility for studying the ellowstone bear.
``f you want to protect bears for future generations, you have to protect the habitat they need.
''e happen to live in the last great place.
attson, who works for the .. eological urvey, said he has not taken a position on delisting, but he worries that not enough is known about comparatively new threats such as climate change and the proliferation of non-native species that could deplete some of the bears' food sources by 90 percent in the future.
ack of investigative traction is also the result of widespread local animosity toward the ndangered pecies ct, said ominic omenici, resident agent in charge of law enforcement for ish and ildlife.
ellowstone boasts the largest grizzly population in the lower 48 states, though a few smaller groups live in areas such as the orthern ontinental ivide cosystem near anada, ontana's abinet aak wilderness and daho's elkirk ountains.
he plan for delisting does not apply to other clusters of grizzlies.
ine endangered species have gone extinct, and the government has de-listed 13 species that were listed erroneously.
 few of the many species of native flora and fauna illegally taken from national parks:
ince 1983, the bear population has roughly tripled to 600 animals roaming the 5.8 million acre recovery zone.
t has expanded from 6 million acres in the 1980s as the comeback of the grizzlies, estimated at between 500 and 800 bears, has gained momentum.
hree senators who attended the nterior news conference uesday used the delisting as an opportunity to call for reform of the endangered species law.
nd the reddish crowns of dying whitebark pines continue to advance across ellowstone.
he combination of blister rust and the beetle outbreak is such a curve.
n fact, the six-year average of female bear deaths exceeded the maximum allowed by the recovery plan in 2004 and 2005, according to federal data.
``e're one of the primary reasons we've got a recovered population.''
hese mortality rates are to be expected when bears punch out into areas where there are more people.''
ervheen, who has been supervising the comeback of the bears for 25 years, said there is a strong possibility that the actual number of illegal kills in the past two years is significantly higher than what game wardens have been able to count.
esearchers believe at least one female grizzly a year has been saved by the measures.
"his is definitely a wake-up call _ this says we have to be very careful with mortality because these bears are going to bounce back slowly, if at all," said errero.
ll they care about is finding food  a lot of it.
"e don't know if whitebark pine will decline," said huck chwartz, a .. eological urvey researcher leading the nteragency rizzly ear tudy eam.
``ou don't go from emergency room to the parking lot.
he bears still need intensive care.''
ut they were driven to the brink of extinction when the ational ark ervice closed garbage dumps where bears fed.
umans are responsible for 85 percent of ellowstone bear deaths, said chwartz.
oreover, new management plans might allow hunting of the bears outside the park.
f their numbers drop below 500, a management review will be triggered.
he deaths fall within new mortality limits that are based on more thorough population estimates now being substituted for the old ones, federal managers say.
``he bears are expanding their numbers and their range.
ome biologists, notably ave attson, a specialist on population assessment who has been studying the ellowstone grizzlies since 1979, are wary of managing by numbers.
``he ush administration has tried to gut forest management plans, and yet the primary enforcement mechanism for protecting these bears is through forest plans,'' said ouglas onnold, managing attorney for the orthern ockies office of arthjustice.
ut ilcox pointed out that in yoming county resolutions have the force of law and could trigger a rash of grizzly killings once the federal government has ceded authority over the animals to the states.
t also wants to make it harder to set aside ``critical habitat''  in effect, wildlife sanctuaries covering millions of acres where commercial and industrial development is restricted.
nvironmental groups are split on the move.
t's a cliche, but its true,`` he said.
``he idea that they are endangered or there is a shortage of them is a crock,'' said tokes, who added that he and many of his listeners ``enjoy watching grizzles'' and that he has never heard talk about harming them.
"he history of blister rust is clear: it spreads and intensifies," said iana omback, a professor at the niversity of olorado at enver who directs the hitebark ine cosystem oundation.
ne of the main goals in the recovery plan required that there be a minimum of 15 sows, or female bears, with cubs each year to assure successful reproduction.
"e won't likely have any good options for those."
``o say that there is a local agenda against bears is to be paranoid,'' tokes said, while quickly adding that federal law enforcement officials ``have good reason to be paranoid because nobody likes them around here anyway, and it is their own doing.''
ig males and sows with cubs need even more food.
t least 25 bears died in the greater ellowstone area last year, including eight breeding-age females killed by people.
rian chweitzer, on hursday said an announcement on grizzly bears was planned, but he did not have details.
n years when whitebarks naturally produce fewer nuts, more ellowstone grizzlies move to the park's edges, where they find hunters' elk carcasses.
y identifying those trees and cultivating their seeds, researchers hope to grow new rust-resistant forests in the future.
``e really don't have any precise ways to count bears or track their growth and decline,'' attson said.
reston envisions a program that helps residents to embrace the region and all of its wildlife, enough to be moved to protect it.
he fact that the bears have rebounded, critics say, doesn't necessarily mean they are recovered.
s for the feds, tokes said, that is a different story.
``hey would be fairly intensively taken care of from now on,'' ervheen said.
hile the number of bears is healthy, they say, some of the bears' critical food sources, like the white bark pine nut, are in steep decline, which could force the bear to leave the park in search of food.
s for who is killing the grizzlies, investigators say they are making little or no progress in their search for suspects or witnesses.
"he ellowstone ecosystem has a fixed amount of habitat," chwartz said.
ow, an estimated 1,200 bears occupy 2 percent of their original land base.
"his is the exception not the rule to the ndangered pecies ct," said en. arry raig, -daho.
he law protects the bears in ellowstone, part of rand eton and in a circle of land outside, known as the ``primary recovery area.''
he rising death toll alarms federal law enforcement officials, as well as government biologists supervising the otherwise successful comeback of the big bears.
he ational ildlife ederation, though, says it is time for environmentalists to rethink how to manage ellowstone's grizzlies  both as a matter of science and as a political tactic in an era of epublican rule.
ow the ellowstone bears fare could well be the most conspicuous test case of the ush administration's policy toward endangered species.
 nine-year study coinciding with burgeoning development in and around anff ational ark has found the area's grizzly bears have the lowest reproductive rate ever recorded in orth merica, scientists at the niversity of algary said.
``t is easy to kill and leave them, and the bodies are never found,'' he said.
e said ellowstone grizzlies represent a relatively small genetic pool.
''hey are the kind of people whose idea of wildlife management is to kill anything that looks at them crossways.
"ou cannot take the second-slowest reproducing species in orth merica, manage it on a knife-edge and expect that in the long term it will survive," cott said.
"ature will always throw you a curve."
 350-pound female needs to average 18,000 kilocalories, or the equivalent of 30 ig acs a day, according to attson.
"s a guy on the ground,  would say it doesn't look too good," he said.
roblem bears have to be removed quickly so the public will accept living with the rest.
emale grizzlies do not reproduce until they are about 8 years old, and generally have litters of one or two cubs every four or five years.
ome experts make the case that legal hunting will bolster support for the grizzlies' survival.
hey are now in places they haven't been in 80 or 100 years.
t will be a tough sell in some places, especially in counties where the bears have been scarce until recent years.
errero said it was important to keep everyone who "works and plays" in the parks focused on a common goal.
he said the administration would like to see the law more focused on recovery efforts than penalizing landowners who find species on their land.
he study of 71 bears between 1994 and 2002 also found that humans were responsible for more than 75 percent of female bear deaths and 86 percent of male deaths in the period.
tripping the bears of protection could eventually clear the way for limited hunting of the massive bears.
ome environmentalists say the decline of whitebark pine is yet another reason why the grizzlies should remain listed as threatened, since the seeds are closely linked to female bears' fecundity.
oth spoke on condition of anonymity because the proposal has not yet been made public.
ohn mmerich, assistant wildlife division chief at yoming's ame and ish epartment, said environmentalists aren't showing enough faith in state officials who have spent years and millions of dollars helping promote the bears' recovery.
ome counties bordering the park have grown by nearly 30 percent.
hat, critics of delisting say, serves as a cautionary tale.
rizzlies don't recognize recovery area boundaries, forest management plans or endangered species politics.
``ven if you start with 500 bears, an annual decline of 2 percent to 5 percent over 15 to 30 years could take them down to 200.''
orest pathologists take a much different view.
f the ellowstone grizzlies are delisted, ervheen said a orest ervice protection plan in six national forests that surround the national park would sharply limit road building, camping, and oil and gas exploration, while retiring existing leases for livestock grazing.
"eople involved in the effort felt strongly the time had come to acknowledge recovery of the bear."
he grizzlies would continue to be monitored by federal scientists, with 10 percent of the bears always wearing radio collars.
roponents of the government's move say the grizzly's recovery marks a rare victory for the controversial law; others say the decision may undermine protections for a still-vulnerable group of animals.
he department's proposed delisting could go into effect as early as 2006, but litigation could delay any ultimate effort to remove federal protections.
n the 19th century, an estimated 50,000 grizzlies roamed across one-third of the ontinental nited tates.
"e're saying we'll be able to respond to changes to make sure the bear's ."
 number of biologists, however, worry that vital bear foods in the heart of the recovery area may already be in peril.
ost worrying to wildlife biologists was the fact that females made up 60 percent of the dead.
o the death of a single bear can have a significant impact on population trends.
ut the fate of the nut is now in doubt.
``ut you will have success when there is proper funding and real cooperation.
''he reater ellowstone cosystem is the last intact predator ecosystem in the world, with the full complement of wildlife that existed at the time of hristopher olumbus.
he findings announced hursday are to be published in the upcoming edition of ournal of ildlife anagement.
"nce bears fill that habitat, the excess bears will probably wind up where they don't belong and are going to die."
reston, an ornithologist, says folks here are not quite at the ``torch and pitchfork stage'' in response to the grizzly, but there is concern.
emale grizzlies mate only every second or third year.
hat study, which is based on nine years of research plus monitoring in 2003 and 2004, will include policy recommendations.
ut huck eal, an ecologist and bear expert retired from the .. ureau of and anagement in yoming, said an anti-bear hysteria drives the hunting discussion e's particularly concerned that state and local officials  susceptible to citizen pressure  will establish bear management plans that permit bear killing in a broad array of circumstances.
ears also have died after being shot by hunters claiming self-defense or saying they mistook a grizzly for a black bear.
"f you don't protect the habitat, it doesn't matter how many bears you have  you'll lose them," said ance . raighead, executive director of the raighead nvironmental esearch nstitute, in ozeman, who maps grizzly bear habitat.
hen the dumps were closed, hungry bears invaded park campgrounds and more than 225 had to be killed.
ome pose a dire threat," attson said.
he human context for the recent jump in illegal grizzly kills (11 so far this year and 10 last year, after 13 years during which the poaching number averaged about three) is one of head-spinning demographic, economic and cultural change.
he delisting plan reaches ashington as the hite ouse, epublicans in ongress, land rights groups and many industry lobbyists are pressing to limit the scope and power of the ndangered pecies ct, which was enacted in 1973 and which many conservatives scorn as costly, clumsy and ineffective.
ntil separated clusters of grizzlies can be reconnected through land corridors, onnold said, it is much too early to delist them.
n the 1960s, the ellowstone bears were hurt by habitat loss.
"asically, we (need) to have 19 out of 20 adult female bears in their reproductive years to survive into the next year," said tephen errero, an environmental scientist at the niversity of algary and co-author of the study.
'' don't support state control of the grizz.
ntil the 1970s, watching dump-diving grizzlies was a popular attraction at ellowstone.
ike nzi and raig homas, both epublicans, also called for reform of the law.
"t's a tricky balance we'll have to maintain."
t's a vignette of pristine merica.''
 fear bears are headed into a wall of lead.``
raditional conflicts between bears and livestock are compounded by exurban sprawl creeping up open valleys across the intermountain est.
nly the shaggy musk ox  like the bear a relic of the ce ge  breeds more slowly.
ear experts believe that an isolated population of fewer than 500 is in danger of losing its genetic diversity and becoming vulnerable to disease and birth defects.
ome opponents of delisting contend that last year's mortality rate underscores the bear's vulnerability to encroaching development.
harles reston, the curator of ody's uffalo ill istoric enter, is developing educational programs that teach about bear-human conflicts.
ome longtime residents, though, are seething over a decades-long regional decline in logging and mining.
he spike in grizzly killing is concentrated here in a rapidly growing, spectacularly scenic but culturally disjointed corner of the est.
``ou can't immunize them against everything bad that can possibly happen,'' iller said.
f delisting occurs, it will probably happen no sooner than mid- to late 2006, the agency said.
andering grizzlies can terrorize rural neighborhoods, chew up a rancher's calves and occasionally maul people.
he ouse passed a bill in eptember that would lessen the government's role in protecting plant and animal habitat.
ne, a high-end development of about 150 homes, will be the county's first gated community.
ut the recent revival has also sparked conflict with nearby residents as the bears venture out of the national park.
n pril 12 of last year, state ame and ish officers shot dead a dangerous nuisance known as ear #92, after the grizzly repeatedly broke into buildings searching for food on a ranch near here.
n late summer and fall, grizzly bears follow an urge to gorge in order to store enough fat to survive hibernation, a condition called hyperphagy.
 more extensive report is expected later this spring examining the grizzly populations in lberta's less protected astern lopes.
n all, four yoming county commissions have passed anti-grizzly resolutions.
he bear population dwindled in the est early in the last century in large part because of hunting and destruction of the animals' habitat.
ess than 20 species have been delisted since the law was signed by resident ichard ixon was signed in 1973.
nowingly killing a grizzly is a federal misdemeanor punishable by as much as six months in jail and a $25,000 fine, as well as restitution payments as high as $15,000.
n 2001, the ush administration shelved a plan to reintroduce grizzlies in a wilderness area along the daho-ontana border, despite strong public sentiment in favor of the move.
he burgeoning ranchettes outside of ody along the orth and outh ork of the hoshone iver are in prime bear habitat.
 possible court battle could also delay efforts to remove federal protections.
t's a 19th-century approach,`` eal said.