apan plans to go to the meeting of the nternational haling ommission () in outh orea in une asking to double its kill of about 440 minke whales a year for so-called scientific purposes, and also add humpback and fin whales to the list.
apan says it will seek approval to expand its catch at the annual meeting of the nternational haling ommission () opening on ay 30 in outh orea.
apan has said it will push for a widening of its research whaling program at a meeting of the  that began in lsan, outh orea last week.
ommercial whaling was banned by the nternational haling ommission in 1986, but a small number of countries _ including apan _ maintain scientific whaling programs in which hundreds of whales are killed each year.
umane ociety nternational was denied permission by ustralia's ederal ourt to sue apanese whaling company yodo enpaku for allegedly killing around 400 minke whales in ntarctic waters the ustralian government has declared a whale sanctuary.
umane ociety nternational was denied permission by ustralia's ederal ourt last week to sue the apanese whaling company for allegedly killing hundreds of whales in ntarctic waters the ustralian government has declared a whale sanctuary.
he nternational haling ommission, or , banned commercial whaling in 1986, but grants limited permits to countries such as apan that maintain whaling programs for scientific purposes.
apanese media reports have said it will seek nearly to double its annual catch of inke whales, currently set at 440, in the ntarctic and to catch the larger humpback and fin whales which are considered endangered by the orld onservation nion.
he nternational haling ommission imposed a moratorium on commercial whaling in 1986, but apan's scientific hunt, in which hundreds of whales are killed each year, is widely regarded as a way of circumventing the moratorium.
apan has not previously killed humpbacks or fin whales as part of its research program, which began in 1987.
apan has said it will push for a widening of its scientific whaling program at a meeting of the  that also began riday in lsan, outh orea.
oward also criticized apan _ which kills about 400 minke whales in ntarctic waters each year _ for reported plans to harvest humpback whales, which were severely depleted by commercial whaling in the early part of last century.
e said he would also discuss the issue with key acific nations ahead of an  vote at a meeting in lsan, outh orea, late next month.
okyo will reportedly tell the  at a meeting starting this month in outh orea that it intends to nearly double its annual catch of minke whales in the ntarctic cean, currently set at 440.
haling opponents say apan is using research as a pretext to continue the commercial sale of whale meat.
"or the past week abor has been calling on the government to take action against apan in the nternational ourt of ustice," udd said.
ustralia strongly opposes apanese plans to expand its whaling catch in ntarctic waters but will not try to board apanese whaling ships there because it could be accused of piracy, ttorney eneral hilip uddock said aturday.
pponents of the plan have claimed that apan is seeking to double to 800 the number of minke whales it will slaughter each year, and to add 50 humpback whales and 50 fin whales.
ut the government opposes an application in ustralia's ederal ourt to prevent a apanese whaling company entering the ustralian-declared whale sanctuary in ntarctica, which apan does not recognise.
okyo is believed to have the votes needed to get its request approved at the next  meeting which begins riday in outh orea.
apan, where whale meat is part of culinary culture, reluctantly halted commercial whaling in line with an  moratorium in 1986, but the next year resumed catches under a loophole that allows "scientific research whaling".
rime inister ohn oward intervened personally, writing to his apanese counterpart unichiro oizumi at the weekend to urge okyo to reconsider its position on whaling, nvironment inister an ampbell said.
udge ames llsop based the rejection on a submission to the court by anberra saying the government cannot legally stop the whaling company hunting in international waters protected by ustralia because apan does not recognize ustralia's jurisdiction over the waters.
e said the government had not taken strong enough steps to stop apanese whaling companies from operating in ustralian waters.
ustralia's rime inister ohn oward on ednesday defended his decision not to intercept whaling boats found in ntarctic waters, saying apan and many other countries do not recognize ustralian territorial claims in ntarctica and a whaling sanctuary that is protected under ustralian law.
okyo has applied to the nternational haling ommission () for permission to nearly double its annual catch of inke whales, currently set at 440, and to catch the larger humpback and fin whales which are considered endangered by the orld onservation nion.
he apanese plan is due to go before the nternational haling ommission () when it meets in outh orea next month.
apan, where whale meat is part of culinary culture, reluctantly halted commercial whaling in line with a 1986  moratorium, but the next year resumed catches under a loophole that allows "research whaling".
"e are vigorously opposed to what they are seeking to do... and we're continuing to be at the forefront of the campaign to have a outh acific whale sanctuary and that is the effort we will continue to make," uddock said.
ttorney-eneral hilip uddock said in the submission given to the court in anuary that the government had no right to enforce its law on apan because okyo did not recognise ustralia's claim of territorial sovereignty over the ustralian ntarctic erritory.
he ustralian government on riday foiled a court bid by international animal rights activists to stop a apanese company from killing whales inside the country's ntarctic sanctuary.
t has applied to the nternational haling ommission () for permission to nearly double its annual catch of inke whales, currently set at 440, and to catch the larger humpback and fin whales which are considered endangered by the orld onservation nion.
t also aims to catch the larger humpback and fin whales which are considered endangered by the orld onservation nion, apanese news reports said.
n his letter to oizumi, oward challenged the apanese claim that it needs to expand its whale kill for research purposes.
n his letter to oizumi, oward challenged the apanese claim that it needs to expand its whale kill for research purposes.
apan, where whale meat is part of the traditional cuisine, reluctantly accepted a 1986 moratorium on commercial whaling by the nternational haling ommission ().
okyo will not yield to foreign pressure seeking to stop it from whaling, a fisheries official said uesday after ustralia stepped up a campaign against apan's annual hunt in the name of scientific research.
apan announced in early pril it intends to seek permission to conduct a "broader and more comprehensive" research whaling program in the ntarctic at the commission's annual meeting in outh orea in mid-une.
he 57-member  is scheduled to hold its annual meeting in lsan, outh orea, from ay 27 to une 24.
"haling is also part of the apanese culture," he said.
apan, where whale meat is part of the traditional cuisine, reluctantly accepted a 1986 moratorium on commercial whaling by the .
aking legal action against apan in the ague-based orld ourt was one option being explored, he said.
ustralia's prime minister on ednesday criticized a move by apan to increase its whale harvest in the ntarctic as a "very bad decision," but stood by his policy of not intercepting apanese whaling boats.
umane ociety campaign director ichael ennedy said he was "bitterly disappointed" by the ruling but said his group may appeal the decision to the full bench of the ederal ourt.
ut federal court justice im llsop dismissed the application because a government submission said legal action against the company could damage relations with okyo and jeopardise ustralia's national interests.
rime inister ohn oward intervened personally, writing to his apanese counterpart unichiro oizumi at the weekend to urge okyo to reconsider its position on whaling.
reen arty lawmakers in ustralia and ew ealand are considering urging consumers to boycott apanese products to protest okyo's plan to expand its annual whale hunt, the party's co-leader said onday.
he opposition abor arty assailed the government's intervention in the case, which coincides with efforts by apan to gain permission from the nternational haling ommission () to double the number of whales it can kill each year.
apan announced in pril it plans to seek permission to extend its research whaling program in the ntarctic when the  meets later this month.
"hat the prime minister has demonstrated is that we are prepared to raise this at levels that it's never been raised before," he said.
uddock said ustralia was "vigorously opposed" to the apanese proposals and would press its efforts to establish a outh acific whale sanctuary.
reen arty co-leader eanette itzsimons said only words are not enough to stop apan's plans for the slaughter and the ew ealand "overnment must take serious action against apan."
owever, llsop granted the animal rights group permission to appeal his decision to the full bench of the ederal ourt.
llsop said the submission, from ustralia's ttorney-eneral hilip uddock, appeared "to have great force" and also expressed concerns that the proposed legal action could jeopardize "ustralia's long term national interests."
ew ealand is seeking all options including a possible legal fight against apan's plan to kill endangered humpback whales, local media said onday.
n rejecting the application, udge ames llsop said ustralia does not have a legal right to stop whaling in international waters protected by ustralia because apan does not recognize ustralia's jurisdiction there.
oward said he would prefer to use diplomatic measures to encourage apan not to kill whales in ntarctic waters, and said ustralia was working with the nited tates, ew ealand and ngland to urge okyo to reconsider its proposal.
nimal advocates hoping to halt a apanese whale hunt announced plans uesday to appeal a legal decision that bars the group from filing a lawsuit against the whaling company yodo enpaku.
arlier this week rime inister ohn oward personally wrote to his apanese counterpart, unichiro oizumi, urging him to scrap the plan to increase apan's whale kill.
e said anberra would press for reform of the  when it meets next month, in a bid to have all forms of whaling banned.
he estimated 2,000 tonnes of meat currently obtained from each year's cull ends up in supermarkets and restaurants across apan.
" think the time has come to look at diplomatic measures, trade measures, to look at things consumers can do," she said.
"e've actually got to show some muscle here," she added.
"f there were any attempt by force to interfere with whaling activities otherwise sanctioned by international agreements, it would be a breach of international agreements."
e cannot allow it to become a target for apanese harpoon guns," she said.
"he humpback whale was almost hunted into extinction.
"he best way to resolve such matters is through bilateral representations and multilateral fora including the nternational haling ommission," uddock said in a statement.
roceeds of about $52 million (euro41.15 million) go back into funding the annual hunts.
ew ealand onservation inister hris arter said he was prepared "to explore any avenue ... if we can stop apan slaughtering these whales."
"his position has only been reinforced today by the decision of the ederal ourt."
itzsimons dismissed apan's scientific whaling as a cover for continuing "to put whale meat on the table in apan."
he umane ociety nternational went to a federal court in ydney seeking permission to take legal against the whaling company yodo enpaku aisha.
ttorney-eneral hilip uddock said the judge had upheld the government's view that it was not appropriate to pursue the campaign against whaling in the ustralian courts.
ut the isheries gency, without commenting on plans to kill more whales near ustralian waters, said apan would continue the whaling which it argues is done for scientific research.
"e have been engaging in research whaling to collect scientific data so we can resume commercial whaling," he said, adding the agency has not been under any pressure from oizumi's office or the foreign ministry.
okyo is believed to have the votes needed to get its request approved at the lsan meeting.
apan, where whale meat is part of culinary culture, reluctantly halted commercial whaling in line with a 1986  moratorium.
ut it resumed catches in 1987 using a loophole that allows "research whaling" and selling the meat on the market, a practice condemned by environmentalists as commercial whaling in disguise.
ut it resumed catches in 1987 using a loophole that allows "research whaling" and selling the meat on the market, a practice condemned by environmentalists as commercial whaling in disguise.
ustralian nvironment inister an ampbell set off unday on a diplomatic lobbying mission to urope and the acific as part of a campaign to undermine apan's push to increase its whale cull.
"he submissions of the attorney-general appear to have great force," llsop said in his ruling.
ustralia last week warned okyo it was embarking on an unprecedented diplomatic campaign to dissuade apan from trying to escalate its killing of whales.
ampbell said oward's strongly-worded letter underscored ustralia's determination to fight apan's whaling plan.
n animal rights group on riday lost a bid to sue a apanese whaling company for allegedly killing hundreds of whales inside an ustralian whale sanctuary.
he group's director, ichael ennedy, said he would appeal the decision within the next two weeks.
e wrote to his counterpart unichiro oizumi, urging apan to scrap reported plans to include species considered endangered among those hunted.
hallenging the plans in the orld ourt should be considered, said itzsimons.
eanette itzsimons told ew ealand's ational adio she had discussed with ustralian reen arty leader ob rown the idea of "some trans-asman consumer action against apan if they succeed" in getting approval from the nternational haling ommission for an expanded whale hunt.
"he sort of efforts that the prime minister has put in and the efforts 've been putting in over many months will continue over the next few weeks, and we won't stop until we achieve success," ampbell said on  radio.
"he sort of efforts that the prime minister has put in and the efforts 've been putting in over many months will continue over the next few weeks, and we won't stop until we achieve success," ampbell said on  radio.
nvironment inister an ampbell said ustralia was "prepared to raise this at levels that it's never been raised before."
" successful appeal to the full ederal ourt could force the government to go beyond hitting apan with rhetoric," ennedy said.
he group accuses the company of unlawfully hunting more than 400 minke whales over the past four years in ustralian waters near ntarctica.
he asman ea separates ustralia and ew ealand, two nations strongly opposed to apan's continuing hunting of whales under a research program.
owever, apan's isheries gency responded by saying that foreign pressure would not force it into changing its whaling policies.
apan has threatened to withdraw from the commission if it does not get approval for increased whaling.
he next year it resumed catches under a loophole that allows "research whaling," despite international protests.
nvironment inister an ampbell said apan risks damaging its reputation in the eyes of most ustralians if it persists with plans to hunt humpback whales.
onservation inister hris arter told , a news agency, that he understands the apanese want to add 80 of each of hampback and fin whales to its legal kill lists.
ampbell said the catching of humpback whales, which migrate the west and east coasts of ustralia in increasing numbers, "is something that will potentially seriously damage the way ustralians perceive apan."
 statement by abor foreign affairs spokesman evin udd said riday's court ruling "has confirmed the oward governments spineless and hypocritical response to the slaughter of whales in the ustralian hale anctuary".
utside the court,  director ichael ennedy told reporters he was "bitterly disappointed" in the decision and hoped to file an appeal later this year.
ustralian rime inister ohn oward took the unusual step of intervening personally.
"ur position on research whaling will not change just because of foreign pressure," said akanori agatomo, deputy director at the ar eas isheries ivision of the agency.
oward noted in his letter that some 1.6 million tourists flock to ustralian shores to watch the whale migration each year.
okyo has repeatedly failed to muster the three-fourths majority of  member nations needed to overturn the commercial whaling ban which took effect in 1986.
"here are other ways of trying to change what  regard as a very bad decision by the apanese, a very bad decision," he added.
arter, who is to attend the  meeting, said ew ealand is fighting the proposal on a number of counts, and taking a case to the orld ourt is one option.
ny direct action would undermine diplomatic efforts, he said.
ustralia said uesday it was engaged in an unprecedented diplomatic campaign to disuade apan from trying to escalate its killing of whales.
"ustralia is of the clear, informed view that whaling under scientific permits should be rejected: it is unnecessary, and nothing less than commercial whaling in disguise," ampbell said in a statement.
e said the mammals migrate through ew ealand waters and provide the basis for a major whale-watching industry.
"iven that non-lethal methods exist for scientific research, ustralia believes that there is no basis for killing whales," oward wrote in the two-page letter, excerpts of which were published in he aily elegraph uesday and confirmed by ampbell.
"iven that non-lethal methods exist for scientific research, ustralia believes that there is no basis for killing whales," wrote oward, noting that 1.6 million tourists flock to ustralian shores to watch the whale migration each year.
haling opponents fear that pro-whaling countries like apan and orway may have a voting majority at the commission for the first time since the 1986 whaling ban was imposed.
haling opponents fear that pro-whaling countries like apan and orway may have a voting majority at the commission for the first time since the 1986 whaling ban was imposed.
oward, who recently agreed to dispatch 450 troops to guard apanese army engineers in southern raq despite domestic opposition to the move and visited okyo last month, said relations between the two countries had never been closer, but that "good friends should always feel free to disagree".
"e're working internationally, we're working bilaterally, we're very, very keen to see firstly, no reopening of commercial whaling, and very importantly, no scientific whaling in the future," he said.
e visited okyo last month and said relations between the two countries had never been closer, but that "good friends should always feel free to disagree".
e're very, very keen to see firstly, no reopening of commercial whaling, and very importantly, no scientific whaling in the future," he said.
"o put ustralian forces at risk in relation to an area where some people would say you have no claims  even though we assert them  could lead to very significant issues in relation to whether what we'd be doing constituted piracy," he told ky ews.
uddock told ky ews that ustralian patrol boats could be accused of piracy if they boarded apanese ships in the area, because of ustralia's obligations under the ntarctic reaty.
ampbell said he would visit key uropean players in the nternational haling ommission ()  including rance, witzerland, enmark, reland and weden  to reinforce ustralia's anti-whaling position.
"t is not science to harvest 400 whales.
he  meeting coincides with the start of ustralia's whale watching season, when hundreds of humpbacks swim up the east coast seeking warmer waters during the southern winter.
"his is clear evidence of the extent of public interest in the continued health and welfare of whales and considerable public concern could be expected, not only in ustralia, but across the globe, were whaling to increase," he said.
okyo has declined to release details of the expanded hunt ahead of the  cientific ommittee's consideration of the proposal in the three weeks prior to the 's full meeting.
oward recently agreed to dispatch 450 troops to guard apanese army engineers in southern raq despite domestic opposition to the move.
"e need to work together to promote conservation."
"he decision to go after the humpback whales as well _ the decision cannot be justified on scientific grounds."
"he ustralian government has the view that the attempt to enforce the  ct (to stop the killing of whales) may upset the diplomatic status quo ... and may be contrary to ustralia's long term national interests," he said.
"he ustralian claim is not recognized by a lot of countries around the world," oward told outhern ross radio in the ueensland state capital, risbane.
t has recently threatened to quit the commission.
apan says lethal research is necessary for accurate data on whales' ages, eating habits and other details and to prove its view that such whale species as minkes are thriving and consuming valuable fish stock.
ustralian government officials have refused to support the group, saying they will use diplomacy to urge apan to curb its whaling activities.