ormer reco iddle chool teacher ebra afave, arrested last year amid allegations she had an affair with a student, is scheduled to stand trial in ecember on two counts of lewd and lascivious battery.
 female teacher pleaded guilty uesday to having sex with a 14-year-old student, avoiding prison as part of a plea agreement.
he arrest is the second in as many years of a female illsborough ounty teacher accused of having sex with a teenage student.
  ebra afave, the former ampa middle school teacher accused of having sex with a 14-year-old male student, will avoid prison under a plea deal announced uesday.
f  were on a jury and a lawyer argued his client should not go to prison because he or she was beautiful,  would be offended.
afave was sentenced to three years of house arrest and seven years probation after pleading guilty last month in illsborough ounty to two counts of lewd and lascivious battery.
 female teacher whose sexual liaisons with a 14-year-old middle school student made tabloid headlines has avoided prison time by pleading guilty to having sex with the boy in a classroom and at her home.
early 18 months after her case sent the tabloids into a tizzy, afave pleaded guilty to two counts of lewd and lascivious battery as part of a plea agreement with prosecutors in illsborough and arion ounty.
s part of the agreement, afave will also plead guilty to three sex charges in arion ounty, including one count of lewd and lascivious exhibition.
 hitch has developed in a plea deal agreed to by a former teacher who pleaded guilty to having sex with a 14-year-old student, a spokesman for the prosecutor said.
"he victim's family indicated they wanted this case over with," inacore said.
he former middle school teacher achieved instant notoriety when she was accused of having sex with a 14-year-old student.
afave pleaded guilty to two counts of lewd and lascivious battery, a felony, in exchange for a sentence of three years of community control and seven years of probation.
olice started investigating allace in une, after the student told her mother what was happening, clroy said.
fter uesday's hearing, afave's attorney, ohn itzgibbons, said the plea was "a fair resolution of this case."
fter uesday's hearing, afave's attorney, ohn itzgibbons, said the plea was "a fair resolution of this case."
f she is guilty, she should go to prison.
"hat the victim's family said, was every time this came up the boy would get harassed at school," he said.
his was someone that he liked," inacore said.
e does not have to go through depositions and a trial," itzgibbons said.
ut udge ale tancil wasn't happy with an agreement the arion ounty prosecutors reached with defense attorney ohn itzgibbons and asked for some changes, idgeway said.
he pleaded guilty to two counts of lewd and lascivious battery.
he victim's mother said after uesday's hearing that the public scrutiny had taken its toll on the family.
"he (afave) has agreed on this plea deal.
hat plea agreement was supposed to also cover charges in arion ounty, where afave allegedly had sex with the boy in a sport utility vehicle while his 15-year-old cousin drove.
f convicted at trial in illsborough ounty, she could have faced up to 15 years in prison on each count.
allace was charged this week with one count of lewd and lascivious battery, a second-degree felony punishable by up to 15 years in prison.
nder the terms of the deal, illsborough ircuit udge ayne immerman sentenced her to three years of house arrest and seven years' probation.
rosecutors released hursday photographs and secretly recorded tapes to support their accusation that ebra aave, formerly a schoolteacher, had sex with a 14-year-old student.
aave will plead not guilty by reason of insanity to avoid a trial scheduled for next year, according to her attorney.
he girl told detectives she did not want allace prosecuted but that she felt guilty about the lies.
e also said afave told him her marriage was in trouble and that she was aroused by the fact that having sex with him was not allowed.
"(ut)  don't think even (afave attorney ohn itzgibbons) could anticipate all of the twists and turns and intensity of the media coverage."
idgeway said the attorneys would take a new plea deal to the judge.
he faces up to 30 years in prison if found guilty on all charges.
ebra afave will serve three years of house arrest and seven years of probation.
he pleaded guilty uesday to two counts of lewd and lascivious battery.
he sister told detective elanee older that she found a "love note" from allace in the back of her sister's pants pocket in 2003.
he student said allace ended the relationship in ugust 2004 because she wanted to have children and felt guilty about betraying her husband, raig allace, a math teacher and girls soccer coach at harton.
"his is a case of someone who has taken advantage of her position to victimize a teenage student," clroy said of allace.
ent in ecember 2002, the note initiated 19 months of sexual encounters between teacher aymee allace and one of her female students, according to police.
"f ebbie was not considered attractive by almost every societal standard," he said, "no one would have been paying any attention to this case."
he boy told investigators afave told him her marriage was in trouble and that she was aroused by the fact that having sex with him was not allowed.
"t allows the young man involved here to go on with his life, just as ebbie can go on with her life.
s in the case of ary ay etourneau, the ashington state school teacher who had a baby with a 13-year-old student, afave's case has generated much scrutiny.
hey pulled the plug on prosecution, agreeing uesday to a plea deal that will keep the former reco iddle chool teacher out of prison.
n uesday, a judge sentenced her to three years of house arrest and seven years of probation.
"e did not from the get go want to harm ebra afave.
inacore said he had pressed for three years' prison time during plea negotiations early this year.
ost importantly he can go on with his."
he can begin going on with her life.
" want to apologize to the court and to the young man involved and his family for my actions.
ow classified as a sex offender, afave avoided prison, but she won't be living on asy treet.
e reached a deal with afave attorney ohn itzgibbons shortly before the two were due back in court to argue over a gag order immerman imposed last week.
f convicted at trial in illsborough ounty, lorida, she could have faced up to 15 years in prison on each count.
ow that both sides have admitted a crush of worldwide media attention helped former ampa teacher ebra afave land a plea deal that avoided prison time for seducing a 14-year-old boy, two questions remain.
ebra afave whose sensational case made tabloid headlines, will serve three years of house arrest and seven years' probation.
he agreement was meant to resolve charges against ebra afave in two counties.
n ugust, the student's mother gave police notes she found, addressed to her daughter from fellow students.
y the spring of 2003, they were having oral sex in the coach's apartment and in parking lots around the city, the student told detectives.
"t would come out and be written about again and again and again in all of the media.
t what point would he have had a normal life in high school, much less be tagged with it the rest of his life?"
o matter where she goes, life will not be the same for ebra afave.
itzgibbons said in uly that plea negotiations had broken off because prosecutors insisted on prison time, which he said would be too dangerous for someone as attractive as afave.
"f you had to sit back and just from a societal point of view, (ask) what impact does the media have by putting such focus on this case when a young boy is going to be affected, that's the balancing act."
s long as he doesn't try to argue that she's too pretty.
ut prosecutor ic idgeway said his office wants to speak with the boy's family first.
aave was accused of lewd acts with a child in several sexual encounters in the illsborough ounty school, in her car, and in the house that she had with her husband, in neighboring cala ounty.
he former reco iddle chool reading teacher apologized during the hearing, saying " accept full responsibility for my actions."
ast year, afave's attorney said he planned to raise an insanity defense.
/his brings us to ebra afave,  //the former (definitely former) instructor at reco iddle chool in illsborough ounty, who faces felony charges alleging, shall we say, improper conduct (definitely improper) with a teenage boy.
 : ut people were in front of me.
he student was 15, a rising star on the girls basketball team that allace coached.
n an. 21 the student wrote that she "wanted to do more than just write notes," according to detectives.
hey arm-wrestled, the student told detectives.
"o try to use (media interest) to make it more difficult for the victims' family to go through this process made sense from a tactical standpoint," said illsborough prosecutor ike inacore, noting that afave attended many hearings in the case, ensuring cameras would capture her every move.
" really don't want to get into the details, but that could be a concern if people know where she lives."
 : ome on up in front.
he victim's mother said this didn't happen," said school district spokesman tephen egarty.
he victim's mother said afterward that the public scrutiny had taken its toll on the family, and they just wanted to see it all end.
as the constant media coverage, which eventually convinced the victim's family to go along with the plea deal, part of the defense's strategy all along?
"y prayer is that he can leave this behind him and go on and be a happy, healthy young man."
"y prayer is that he can leave this behind him and go on and be a happy, healthy young man."
"e've gotten over one hurdle with this matter in the criminal justice system, but now the ramification of being a sexual offender will be with ebbie for 10 years or longer," said her attorney, ohn itzgibbons.
f that doesn't work, itzgibbons still will be entitled to argue that whatever pressures afave felt should be considered as mitigating circumstances to keep her out of prison.
ut the judge in one of the counties has balked, ic idgeway, a spokesman for the tate ttorney's ffice, said hursday.
afave will also be barred from seeking employment in places near children.
f she successfully completes her first two years on house arrest, also known as community control, a judge could waive her last year of home confinement.
he student told detectives the note from allace came tucked inside an envelope, clipped to a graded paper allace handed her in math class.
ike afave, allace was newly married at the time of the alleged encounters.
ut itzgibbons said the temporary ruling would not have stopped the runaway train of attention aimed at the client he once hinted was too pretty for prison.
he biggest complication for afave could be a requirement that she place her name on the state's sex offender registry.
afave apologized during the hearing uesday, saying that " accept full responsibility for my actions."
"n years past, generally, defense lawyers would have little or no comment (on high-profile cases)," itzgibbons said.
"ow, as she begins to look for work and a job, that's going to be a problem because wherever she works, she's going to be the center of attention."
illsborough ircuit udge ayne immerman said aave also will forever lose her teaching certificate, must register with the state as a sexual predator, may not have any contact with children including the victim, and will not be allowed to profit from the sale of her story or personal appearances.
ow classified as a sex offender, the former teacher can no longer work with or near children and cannot live within 1,000 feet of a school, church or playground.
adilla has been moved to federal detention facility in iami from outh arolina navy brig.
ince  have not heard all the evidence, and since  am not employed by a cable television network,  am content to wait to hear his case.
ut atthew elling, media director for the enter for edia and ublic ffairs, criticized such sensationalistic elements.
allace posted $7,500 bail within hours of her arrest and left the county jail onday afternoon.
adilla is a rooklyn-born uslim convert.
wo of the other four indicted with him are from roward ounty.
ue images of leering prison matrons from hained eat.
  "irty omb" suspect ose adilla, held by the nited tates as an enemy combatant for more than three years, has been indicted on federal charges in iami.
n a county with nearly 200 parks, 400 day care centers, 240 public schools and 1,200 churches that may have youth centers, that will make house-hunting tough.
afave must give a blood sample to authorities so that her  can be registered in a statewide database.
here is an establishment every half a square mile that she can't be near.
hese traumatic events have an effect on her bi-polar illness.
--- (ndated)  he ce arvest is a frigid film noir laced with snappy tough-guy talk, plus a sick sense of humor that some moviegoers won't see any reason for during the holiday season.
usan aron at t. ndrew's nited ethodist hurch in randon, according to county records.
   federal grand jury has launched an investigation into problems at itizens roperty nsurance, state officials confirmed.
mong those receiving subpoenas is oe ebrun, who was involved in the exas lawsuit accusing itizens' former chief operating officer aul ulsebush with a bribery scheme.
afave's former ast ay igh schoolmate and lover, asie iana artinez, told prosecutors that the teenage afave had struggled with her sexuality and self-image.
   & with the visiting en tein, economist/ixon hite ouse protege/actor/author/political commentator.
  ech ata, the bay area's largest public company, has removed its top uropean chief from power.
ts third-quarter sales beats analysts' estimates but profits fall on more restructuring charges in urope.
all treet likes the aggressive moves, pushes ech ata stock up 15 percent.
undits and reporters across the country have picked through every last detail, from her recent divorce to a judge's decision barring access to police photos of her genitals.
lstott says it's nothing planned, just instinct.
  he free trip to anada for four state legislators as paid guests of a gambling lobbyist has provided fresh momentum for the egislature to revisit the problem of lobbyist influence in a special session in two weeks.
ut police say he fell asleep at the wheel, which is reckless driving.
  ays players are happy ill vers will be on the big-league staff in 2006.
  ent is an indispensable movie because it freeze-frames a specific merican era while preserving roadway history by proxy.
ut it's also frisky and funny, with a streak of unconditional kindness as wide as the screen.
nd that court reached far and wide, with afave stories featured on eb sites in ussia and hina, and newspapers in ustralia and anada.
ut the room fell silent as afave stepped to the podium to face her punishment.
he announcement sent a ripple through the courtroom as reporters hurriedly scribbled in note pads and scrambled for cell phones.
he plot is flimsy, but viewers in the proper frame of mind can enjoy ohn usack's brand of deadpan affability, illy ob hornton's bantam rooster outbursts and a supporting cast relishing their amoral characters.
l harpton, even eraldo ivera, are flocking to eus' side, saying the punishment doesn't fit the crime.
e did say, however, that the media coverage "was by far the most critical factor of the entire case," highlighting how criminal law tactics must change in a media-drenched world.
he first try by enate resident om ee flopped last spring, prompting applause from lobbyists celebrating the triumph of the status quo, with its weak disclosure provisions.
ee wants to raise the issue again in the ec. 5 session, with limits on acceptance of in-kind donations that permitted agna ntertainment orp. to spend $48,000 on the uly trip to oronto and launder the expense through the epublican arty of lorida.
our years ago he was driving a truck that overturned in ardee ounty, killing a woman and her 8-year-old daughter.
 quick look through a database of media stories found at least 168 print stories since 2003 on afave and about 515  news items.
till, the combination of factors - her beauty, her handsome ex-husband and a past that included a lesbian relationship - made saturation coverage inevitable.
" fully admit  was one of the ones eating from the trough on this one," said -93.3  radio personality .. elli, who featured photos of the bikini-clad afave on his show's web site.
"ex offenders from aine to an iego have been sent a message that if they pick the right victim the prosecutors are going to throw their hands up," said carborough, while the channel displayed a headline reading "ex eacher alks."
e learns this waiting in line at the supermarket:
"ike,  just don't,  mean,  don't want you lying to your mom."
"ore often than not, they do not make it."
fter a basketball game, allace drove the student to a running trail on 's campus.
"e take these allegations very seriously, and when these things come up, we want to protect the children," egarty said.
y the time the meetings broke off in ugust 2004, the two had engaged in sexual activities more than 50 times, the girl, now 17, told ampa police.
etectives started interviewing fellow students, including the player's sister.
"e're going to have tons of people come forward to give glowing reviews about her and her coaching," he said.
"he goes to the mall, and people point to her, and people come up to her," itzgibbons said.
"he student was convinced the two of them were in love," said ampa police spokeswoman aura clroy.
"very time a story aired the attention on the victim's family escalated," said inacore, who nevertheless gave most mainstream media coverage high marks.
n the end, the boy's mother decided not to gamble on a trial and to save her son the humiliation.
he victim's mother said the boy is "well-adjusted" and shows no signs of having been traumatized.
 don't think ebbie could survive it.
ll along her attorney has turned the spotlight to his advantage.
itzgibbons said the judge indicated that he wanted to hear expert information about a trial's potential impact on the two boys involved.
t was my feeling that any juror who listened to the testimony of all the difficulties ebbie has gone through would have found it a very sad and compelling story," itzgibbons said.
he case attracted national attention, and her lawyer had rejected an earlier plea arrangement that called for three years in prison, saying afave was too attractive to survive in jail.
  an the olts go undefeated?
lthough the teenager had agreed to detail the relationship on the witness stand, it was unclear how his testimony about his feelings for afave might impact a jury, inacore said.
egarty said she was transferred to the school district's ffice of rofessional tandards, where she has no contact with students.
 psychologist hired by the state concluded afave was sane when she had sex with the boy.
e might have argued that mitigating factors, whatever they are, should spare her from incarceration.
his week, talks over a plea deal between afave and prosecutors broke down, and her trial was rescheduled for ecember.
illsborough ircuit udge ayne immerman said aave will forever lose her teaching certificate, must register with the state as a sexual predator, may not have any contact with children including the victim, and will not be allowed to profit from the sale of her story or personal appearances.
he is accused of the same crime as many a male teacher who has abused his position of authority and trust.
he boy told investigators he and afave had sex in a classroom at the school, located in emple errace near ampa, in her iverview town house and once in a vehicle while his 15-year-old cousin drove them around.
he last-minute move spared afave the possibility of as much as 30 years in prison and saved her victim, who was 14 when the sexual encounters occurred, from the crush of a media frenzy.
he plea agreement also was designed to resolve similar charges in arion ounty, where afave was scheduled to appear in court ec. 8.
  otes about the ightning.
"s a society, we try not to have these situations repeat themselves," he said, "but sometimes we put up so many obstacles and challenges that it makes it difficult for them not to repeat this behavior or do other things.
n general,  do not mind if beautiful people believe they have a separate set of rules, as long as they do not expect me to admire them, and do not ask me to go out of my way for them.
eter is taken to a luxury mansion where all the beautiful people in town hang out.
hey would meet in allace's car, in her ampa alms apartment, and near a running trail at the niversity of outh lorida, the girl said.
he became varsity basketball coach in spring 2003, after having coached the junior varsity team.
he joked with some players that raig allace was suspicious of her relationship with team members, former student and player ikki elley told police.
ven illsborough prosecutor ichael inacore said the road ahead for afave will be difficult.
" am in the provocative broadcast business and  am going to give people what they want.
clroy said detectives have found no evidence of other victims.
illsborough prosecutor ike inacore said media attention played a big part in the state's decision to head back to the bargaining table.
"f we had continued along this path, this would have followed him forever," said the mother, whose name was being withheld to protect her son's identity.
"f we had continued along this path, this would have followed him forever," said the mother, whose name was being withheld to protect her son's identity.
" couldn't imagine sitting there and looking at my son and then looking at him surrounded by the whole courtroom as well as looking at afave talking about things that shouldn't have happened to him," the mother said.
er name is being withheld to protect her son's identity.
"f somebody successfully makes it through sex offender probation, they probably deserve a break," he said after uesday's sentencing.
n uesday, the victim was set to answer attorney questions at a formal deposition.
 ith just a week to go before trial, the glare of celebrity had not dimmed.
"he is a sexual offender and if it were a male she would have definitely gotten jail time," he told 's "he arly how."
itzgibbons declined to comment directly on how the media might have impacted the family.
ast month, a illsborough judge said she will forever lose her teaching certificate, must register with the state as a sexual predator, may not have any contact with children including the victim, and will not be allowed to profit from the sale of her story or personal appearances.
 accept full responsibility for my actions and 'm very sorry," afave said.
he lawyer might have tried to argue that afave's crimes were not worthy of prison (good luck with that).
ut whether deliberate or automatic, itzgibbons' argument was precisely that afave should not be subjected to prison because she is beautiful.
id race play a factor in prosecutors' decision to charge him, and/or the judge's choice of sentence?
he boy told investigators the two had sex in a classroom at the school, located in emple errace near ampa, in her iverview town house and once in a vehicle while his 15-year-old cousin drove them around arion ounty.
"f we were at trial, the doctors would be explaining how trauma over the years has affected ebbie.
imes staff writer att aite and researchers aryn aird and athy os contributed to this report.
ome supported itzgibbons' claims about her battle with mental illness and the trauma she suffered when she was raped at 13.
"hen people report on male pedophiles, words are tossed around like "predator' or "mental illness.'
ounder of the university's exual isorders linic, erlin said that afave, like most female offenders, is unlikely to repeat her behavior, but her battle with mental illness and the scrutiny of her case will present extra challenges.
n the stories about afave,  saw words like "bombshell' and "romp.'
  overage of the ightning-lyers game.
eter riffin, the loutish lead character in the animated  series he amily uy, gets liposuction in one episode and discovers that beautiful people enjoy a secret and privileged existence.
"eally, that was from her mom pressuring her to a music career and trying to fit that mold of being thin, being a star, you know, fitting that role of being on stage," artinez said.
" just didn't want to get you pregnant or anything.
eople might stop staring, but someone will always be checking on her.
or months afterward, the victim's family held fast to the idea that afave should do time.
he wrote allace back and expressed interest.
 nvestigators say it began with a note, passed in a math class at harton igh chool.
he married allace, a native of amaica, in a ceremony conducted une 7 by the ev.
ut for a woman whose image has been beamed around the world and plastered on the front pages of newspapers, the registry could prove not just invasive but dangerous.
ast ecember, the ew ork ost published a full-page photo of afave modeling a bikini beside a motorcycle; in uly 2004, the ritish tabloid newspaper ews of the orld published the name and school photo of her victim.
he would be "raw meat in with the lions."
"he becomes a co-conspirator because she doesn't want the relationship to end."
etails of afave's past and the student's experiences with her became clearer uesday afternoon after the tate ttorney's ffice released hundreds of pages of documents that could have been aired at trial.
 spokeswoman for  said carborough was too busy to comment after the show.
"s you the first girl she messed with?"
t is available to the public on the nternet.
"ecember is a pretty slow news month."
 was just thinking about it, how we've had sex about three times and  should've used like a condom or something."
f course,  would stick by my oath to consider only the facts.
"hat's my goal, to keep him whole," the boy's mother said in an interview with -h.
 don't think it's a cakewalk what's been handed to her.
ansas tate niversity professor ob hoop, an expert witness in cases involving sexual abuse between teachers and students, said students usually don't report the incidents.
he papers include interviews with afave's former husband, ristian wen afave as well as a woman she dated in high school and a co-worker.
 host oe carborough personified the media paradox this week, railing against the plea deal while perpetuating the news coverage that helped seal it.
inally, the boy's family could take no more.
"he student feels this is a real relationship," hoop said, speaking generally.
ut his most surprising supporters are the victims' relatives, who think this was all a tragic accident, not a crime.
aave was arrested in une and suspended from her job until the trial is over.
afave's ex-husband, wen afave, said ednesday that she was being treated for mental problems when she committed the crime, but it was a double standard that she avoided prison.
rosecutors released photographs taken in a department store where they said the teacher had taken the youth, supposedly the day his relatives began to suspect that there was something between the two.
he tapes, broadcast over local television, recorded aave arranging an encounter with the youth, while expressing concern that he not lie to his mother, ampa prosecutors said.
he ush administration had resisted calls to charge and try him in civilian courts.
everal tense minutes later, the plea deal was announced.
itzgibbons intends to raise an insanity defense.
s a sex offender, afave is barred from living within 1,000 feet of a school, a playground or other areas where children gather.
e nearly lost that strategic edge last week when immerman issued a gag order barring attorneys on both sides from talking publicly about afave.
he prosecutors said they have seven such tape recordings.
arry ing, att auer, reta an usteren - they all wanted ebra afave, the former ampa teacher accused of seducing a teenage boy.
e said then that she planned to plead insanity at trial, claiming emotional stress kept her from knowing right from wrong.
imes staff writers eith iebuhr, cott urks and effrey olochek and researcher athy os contributed to this report.
imes staff writer ennifer iberto contributed to this report.
f we want to report on pedophiles responsibly - and 'm not sold that the media wants to - we need to make the reporting gender neutral."
he said she once saw the two lying naked on allace's bed.
ither we change our laws to say it's not as bad when a woman does it, or we need to apply the law regardless of who the defendant is.
he must undergo psychological therapy for four years and submit to a polygraph test once a year to verify that she is abiding by the rules.
orgeous guys like us don't have to wait in line.
he also must abide by a 10 p.m. curfew.
ut occasionally even the lives of beautiful people intersect those of the less beautiful, and in such cases, the common rules of society must apply.
ut, like that crazy umpire in onday night's evil ays game,  would not be inclined to give the tie to the runner, if you know what  mean.
ast season, the ildcats won their district, finished 21-8 and reached the second round of the lass 5 playoffs, where they were defeated by aines ity, 62-57.
sked how she felt afterward, afave said "tired."
he boy said he and afave, a newlywed at the time, got to know each other on their way back from a class trip to eaorld rlando in ay 2004.
er husband of less than one year filed for divorce in ugust.
 he spotlight will fade, but her neighbors will always know.
"verybody who would know about this said it wasn't happening."
t's a family drama with three unhinged characters worth following, and a fourth who's a typically gifted movie kid - in this case, a spelling bee whiz.
he student hid encounters from her parents for months, even as campus rumors and allegations triggered questions from harton officials in the spring.
n another part of the tape, the boy expressed his concern about pregnancy.
"ou my dawg and  love you   , but  think coach should be punished!"
afave's lawyer, the veteran and able ohn itzgibbons of ampa, objected because the state wished her to serve what he considered an unacceptable amount of prison time.
ut early that morning, inacore asked a judge for a meeting in his chambers to discuss a possible resolution.
ven a judge's gag order could not put the blue-eyed blonde and her media magnet lawyer back in the box.
ut in the weeks leading up to the high-profile trial, the fortitude of the family seemed to wane.
 would not recognize aris ilton, who  gather is a beautiful person of current notoriety, if she marched in the front door to cancel her subscription.
nder allace, harton had one of the county's top programs.
afave's sexual liaisons made tabloid headlines.
inkie promise, say: 'pinkie promise'," the woman's voice on the tape said.
afave, who lives in southeast illsborough ounty with her parents, will soon seek her own place, itzgibbons said.
ut several psychiatrists have since evaluated her and several, itzgibbons said, determined that trauma she suffered after she was raped at 13 and her subsequent mental illness may have led her to actions.
r. red erlin, a ohns opkins niversity professor, said reintegrating into society is always difficult for sex offenders.
  ucs running back ike lstott has become ir lstott, going over the top with regularity at the goal line.
eus' supporters note that he wasn't drunk or on drugs.
esides psychological therapy, annual polygraphs and unannounced visits from her probation officer, she will have to submit to an  test.
  nside the ame: he art of the punt block.
ach personal story is complex, deserving more attention than co-directors cott cehee and avid iegel provide.
aturally, even in he amily uy's twisted application of  sitcom rules, eter eventually learns the error of his ways and goes back to being his old unattractive self.
he previous season, harton went 23-8 with a district title and state playoff appearance.
allace isn't coaching or teaching this year.
e said he and afave, a newlywed at the time, got to know each other on their way back from a class trip to eaorld rlando in ay 2004.
tate law makes it illegal for anyone 24 or older to engage in sexual activity with a person under 18.
he t. etersburg imes plans to move the following stories for clients of the ew ork imes ews ervice for editions of ednesday, ovember 22, and thereafter.
o place an attractive young woman in that kind of hell hole is like placing a piece of raw meat in with the lions.
 :  /ou haven't been beautiful very long, have you?
  ee eason has enough interesting ideas for three or four movies, any of which would be an improvement over this jumble.
"n the last decade, with the proliferation of 24-hour news, the nternet and the large press departments of the police departments, you cannot effectively represent your client unless you can represent that client in the court of public opinion."
er attorney, oe odiford of ampa, said his client maintains her innocence.
hose negotiations foundered in ctober.
"he whole world would have been here," said hil etlin, vice president of news at -h.
"ebbie and my office have received literally hundreds of letters from all over the country, and some of these letters are disturbing," itzgibbons said.
he database contains the names and addresses of sex offenders and some details of their charges.
till, there's little doubt the plea deal avoided a trial which could have brought a bigger media circus than even the erri chiavo case.
nd since many employers require applicants to disclose whether they've been convicted of a felony, afave's job search won't be easy.
nd should media outlets have tried harder to avoid becoming the biggest factor in a case they were supposed to only observe?
"t's total exploitation of the student's trust."
  ean laude eus, a aitian immigrant, is serving 15 years in prison for vehicular homicide.
any sex offenders manage to remain relatively anonymous.
"h, you're being weird," a boy's voice replied.
t affects their ability to earn a living and find a comfortable place to live."
hat is a tough job under lorida law, since the legal standard for insanity is being so wacked out that you didn't know what you were doing was wrong.