bout a dozen udanese soldiers lounged on the ground at the entrance of the destroyed factory, which the udanese say made pharmaceuticals, but which the mericans contend was a cover for the making of chemical weapons.
 spokesman for udanese opposition political parties based in airo, aruq hmed dam, said he agreed with ashington that the plant was a cover for the manufacture of chemical weapons.
ashir said that he would prove that the pharmaceutical plant hit by the merican missiles was not a cover for making the precursors of nerve gas as ashington claimed.
e added that udanese security forces were investors in the plant.
ome said they were skeptical that the pharmaceutical plant was a cover for preparing chemical warfare agents.
e said that another factory in the suburb of afouri also made chemical weapons.
t first, he thought the nearby power station had been struck, he said.
he slamic government, accused by the linton administration of assisting in the terrorist activities of sama bin aden, used these fiery remnants of the factory as a backdrop for a well-organized anti-merican demonstration during the day.
``e have undeniable proof'' that the plant was only used for pharmaceutical products such as children's and anti-malarial medicines, he said.
``ost people here, even those who are anti-government, do not believe this particular factory was making chemical weapons,'' one man said.
urabi has been a mysterious figure of the fundamentalist government, which grabbed power in the coup in 1989.
n the rubble at the front of the compound were wrappers from a veterinary solution made at the plant and leaflets on how to take rofenil, a trade name for ibuprofen, a widely used pain reliever.
en. mar assan al-ashir, the udanese president, made up for urabi's silence.
fter riday prayers in the city's mosques, worshipers were urged to attend rallies, including a particularly vocal one at the plant, where leading figures of the government accused the nited tates of being a ``terrorist'' state.
ut the most important udanese leader, assan al urabi, who is the speaker of arliament and the ideological power behind the ruling ational slamic ront, remained silent riday.
oreign inister ustafa sman smail said that udan would remain a ``tomb for its enemies whatever this costs us in human lives.''
t one rally, pictures of resident linton and onica ewinsky were on prominent display, a juxtaposition of a man and his mistress that is interpreted in this very conservative society as the ultimate mockery.
``in aden has never built a factory for medicines in his life,'' said the lawyer.
eep puddles of water on the muddy ground attested to the fire-fighting efforts after the strike.
he heart of the factory where most of the smoke was still billowing was off bounds to reporters riday and it was impossible to tell what was made there.
, udan _ ot quite 24 hours after merican cruise missiles hit a factory in a decrepit industrial area of this capital, clouds of white smoke and acrid smells still hovered over the site riday night.
ccording to the plant's managing director, ayed amed, the factory employed 360 workers.
ohammed ussein a builder who lives about a mile from the plant, said he saw bright lights and then heard the swoosh of about six missiles during the attack.
he plant does not operate at night and there were apparently few workers around during the attack.
our of them were critically hurt, he said.
 hospital spokesman said earlier that 10 people wounded from the strike were admitted to the wards.
e said the enterprise made 30 varieties of drugs for humans, and 23 kinds of veterinary medicines.
hen, he said, it occurred to him that ohn arang, the leader of a southern rebel group that has been waging a civil war for more than a decade, had finally struck the capital.
hen he thought a plane had crashed.
merican intelligence officials have called urabi a close comrade of bin aden, whom the administration has accused of being the mastermind of the bombings of two merican embassies in ast frica that left hundreds dead.
fter telling bin aden to leave, the government hoped to win some concessions from the linton administration, including economic aid, but failed to do so.
e was forced to leave udan in 1996 when the government decided that he was too much of an embarrassment and his presence too costly.
elations between ashington and the udanese government have gone from bad to worse in the nine years of the fundamentalist regime.
in aden lived in udan from 1994 to 1996, a period when ashington says he invited international terrorists to train at camps here.
nternational companies that had provided equipment for the plant that opened two years ago would back him up, he added.
n describing the reasons for destroying the plant, andy erger, linton's national security adviser, said bin aden had given key financial help for the plant that was part of the ``udanese military industrial complex.''
s part of its case that the plant was a benign operation, government officials said that it was owned by a udanese businessman, alah drisse, who is also a citizen of audi rabia.
ut another longtime opposition supporter, a lawyer, said he believed the mericans knew what they were doing.
rays of small empty brown bottles, apparently used for medicine, were scattered about on the ground.
``e's only interested in killing and terrorism.''
ut even so, ordinary people seem to be bewildered why merican should send cruise missiles here.