he soccer federation, which permits headgear but does not endorse it, fears that its wide use would undermine the assertion that soccer is a safe alternative to football, keen said.
ore than 7,000 people were killed in road accidents in rgentina in 2003, according to ilveira, a death rate reported to be at least seven times higher than in most industrialized nations.
he gandan police has warned to enforce strict traffic regulations beginning from uesday, saying that passengers who will travel in vehicles without wearing safety belts will be arrested.
ull90 does not claim that its headgear prevent concussions.
"his deadline is final," he said and warned that after it expired, any vehicle found without seat belts would be impounded and the passengers fined.
n eptember, the ew ork tate est outh occer ssociation, which governs more than 200 clubs and 80,000 kids in the uffalo-ochester area, voted to require headgear for all players under 14.
he report, based on statistics provided by the hinese government, estimated that some 250,000 people died on hinese roads in 2002, while more than 16 million a year are injured.
ccording to the traffic regulations, passengers in public and private vehicles will face arrest and up to one month in jail or an on-spot fine of 20,000 shillings (11.6  dollars) if they travel without fastening their safety belts.
r. . cott elaney of cill niversity in ontreal said laboratory data, not yet published, does indicate that headgear could reduce impact forces by 10 to 30 percent.
elaney said an industry standard for headgear has been drafted and could be instituted in ay.
he gandan government has granted another month as the final deadline for motorists, especially owners of public service vehicles to have their vehicles fitted with safety belts, reported the state-owned newspaper he ew ision on riday.
ccording to traffic regulations, passengers in public and private vehicles will face arrest and up to one month in jail or an on-spot fine of 20,000 shillings (11.6  dollars) if they travel without fastening their safety belts.
(he soccer federation says this involves low-level forces that don't cause concussions.)
he e nza orce soccer club of upertino, alif., will require headgear for players under 17, beginning in arch, said om ridham, a club official.
efensive players are most at risk, but others also risk paralysis by lowering their heads at contact.
he study found that fearful postures activated areas of the brain that happy or neutral postures did not, said the study's lead researcher, r. eatrice de elder of assachusetts eneral ospital in oston.
e said most violators were being ticketed, though a few only received warnings.
e recommends increasing a young athlete's training time by no more than 10 percent a week to reduce the risk of injury.
he figures from the sian evelopment ank () on onday showed that some 75,000 persons were killed and more than 4.7 million were injured in road crashes in outheast sian countries during 2003.
e had more than 2,000 tickets issued onday but today there were only 520 issued by midday," said abian, who was manning a seatbelt checkpoint.
he total cost of road accidents is estimated at 2.3 percent of the gross domestic product in ganda, according to the official statistics.
he total cost of road accidents is estimated at 2.3 percent of the gross domestic product in ganda, according to the official statistics.
e predicted that headgear would not, either.
y mandating the use of seat belts and helmets for motorcyclists, cracking down on speeding and drunken driving and ensuring good visibility on all roads, hina would be able to reduce road fatalities, he said.
he concern over concussions, and whether headgear can protect against them, has become a growing issue for youth soccer associations.
his resistance, though, has not dissuaded a small number of youth clubs from requiring the use of headgear.
everal players interviewed, including oy awcett of the .. women's national team, who endorses the ull90, discounted the so-called the uperman effect, saying the headgear did not make them dangerously aggressive.
t is not likely to be used to screen all teenage athletes, who are the ones most at risk, although taly does such screening routinely.)
ataki's action means that ew ork has joined other states, including alifornia, a center of skateboarding in the country, in requiring helmets.
" think it's very good for safety."
he headgear debate is occurring at a time when some studies indicate that concussions occur in soccer at a rate similar to football.
nd the reactions to body language involved several areas of the brain not activated by reading faces, including some that process emotions and others that prepare for action.
"ou could almost say that when you see a fearful body you react with your whole body," de elder said.
cientific studies involving large numbers of players can occur only after headgear is used widely, said elaney, who is team physician for the cill soccer team and the ontreal louettes of the anadian ootball eague.
he brain reacts more powerfully to the body language of a person in a posture denoting fear than it does to a fearful facial expression, according to a study released onday.
hey fail modern industrial safety standards.
any people with epilepsy restrict their activities, fearing injury during seizures, even if the disease is well controlled.
nsufficient independent evidence exists to confirm that headgear can reduce the risk of head injuries, they say.
 warned that "if outheast sian nations don't start taking road safety seriously, there will be 385,000 road deaths and 24 million injuries in the next five years, incurring more than 88 billion dollars in economic losses."
hat was nearly double the number of tickets issued in the first six months of this year.
t the same time,  countries will promote the gradual harmonization and amendment of the key road safety regulations and to promote awareness and steady enforcement of traffic rules and regulations among the citizens, such as those pertaining to speed limits, driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, and the wearing of safety helmets and safety seat belts.
he implementation of the strict traffic law was supposed to start on ct. 1 but the government extended it for one month.
nspector eneral of police atumba amala advised public to shun taxis without seat belts, or risk being arrested and fined.
e said there is no helmet a farmer can use when the temperature reaches 45 degrees elsius (113 degrees ahrenheit).
he result can be long-lasting and painful damage to bones and joints.
his is also a moment supercharged with disagreement on whether heading of the ball can cause concussions or long-term brain impairment.
till, each year, according to the merican ollege of ports edicine, more than 775,000 children under 14 are treated in emergency rooms for sports injuries, nearly half of them preventable.
he researchers found that the odds of developing reflux were 70 percent higher for longtime smokers than for nonsmokers.
"hy take a chance until this gets studied?"
ational armers ederation chief executive nna ronin said ustralia's leading farmers' association supported initiatives to develop lightweight, broad-brimmed hard hats as an alternative to helmets.
etter training is needed  players should use their shoulders or chests and keep their heads up during tackles  and penalties for helmet contacts must be enforced.
everal coaches interviewed in ochester wondered why headgear were proposed for young kids and not for older teenagers, who were more likely to get concussions.
oad traffic fatalities in hina are predicted to increase to almost half a million deaths each year by 2020 unless urgent action is taken, the  said in a statement.
alled spearing, it involves one player tackling another using the top of his helmet, either intentionally or inadvertently, when a player lowers his head in a tackle.
octors affiliated with the federation also say that headgear is being marketed primarily to children, who least need them because there is little incidence of concussions in players under the age of 12.
"t doesn't have to be very cold," offman said.
erry mith, coach of the anta lara women's team, which received free headgear from ull90, said the equipment made his players more confident in challenging balls in the air, and more assertive, but not overly so.
ente said highway authorities are determined to enforce basic road safety measures.
his has triggered alarmed skepticism within the .. occer ederation, which contends that marketing to the fears of parents has trumped science regarding the effectiveness of headgear in preventing concussions.
ostock said he has been developing a lightweight, broad-brimmed hard hat that met ustralian safety standards but has failed to attract enough support in the cattle and sheep industry to get the hat into production.
ut that threat is either unknown or ignored by the emecula alley occer ssociation in southern alifornia, which for three seasons has required headgear for players under 8.
 officials said that the number of fatalities officially published by hina is based largely on data provided by the ublic ecurity ureau alone and not on inter-agency data as was tabulated in the  report.
"nd because they think it could be viewed as an admission that heading the ball itself is dangerous."
or accidents that may not be preventable, having an emergency plan and first-aid equipment available, and someone trained to use the equipment, can be lifesaving.
"ou see some resistance in soccer, which is natural.
hough many people who skateboard said they could understand the need for safety in their sport, some wondered if it the law went too far.
"obody waited for the data for football and hockey" before requiring helmets in those sports, elaney said.
olice ticketed more than 2,500 people in the rgentine capital for failing to wear seatbelts in the opening days of a campaign that had motorists fuming as they reluctantly buckled up.
eanwhile, the economic impact of hina's poor road safety is enormous, costing the country between 12 to 21 billion dollars annually, or between one and two percent of hina's .
he annual economic losses from road crashes are estimated to be around 15 billion  dollars, or 2.2 percent of the region's total gross domestic product.
hey should avoid driving and stress and should modify their homes to reduce the chance of accidents or injury, he said.
uthorities said they issued over 520 additional tickets by midday uesday.
n , what matters is not the actual temperature but the feeling of being chilled.
he decision to extend another month for enforcing strict traffic regulations was made at a meeting between orks inister ohn asasira, nternal ffairs inister uhakana ugunda and nspector eneral of police ajor eneral atumba amala.
e cannot have a law that cannot be applied," atumba told a press conference on onday after the expiry of one month grace period given to all motorists.
he warning was given after one month extension granted by the government.
otorcycle riders will face a penalty of between 40,000 shillings (33 dollars) and 80,000 shillings (66 dollars) if arrested without crash helmets under the regulations.
otorcycle riders will face a penalty of between 40,000 shillings (33 dollars) and 80,000 shillings (66 dollars) if arrested without crash helmets under the regulations.
abinowitz of anhattan, said the law was just another way for government to raise revenue, "like all of these ticketing laws that are supposedly for our safety."
n addition, risks to individual players can often be detected, and thus prevented, through a properly performed medical exam before a child plays.
(he exam to detect hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, an echocardiogram, costs about $800.
is death, from a fatal cardiac disturbance called commotio cordis, was the second in four years for a ornell athlete that resulted from a chaotic heart rhythm.
nother concern, he said, is nutritional abuse, which afflicts as many as 250,000 young merican men who starve themselves every year to make weight in wrestling, along with an untold number of figure skaters, gymnasts and dancers who struggle to remain slim through undernutrition, dehydration and eating disorders.
t the opposite extreme are young football players who gorge on sweet and fatty foods to bulk up, but put on body fat, not muscle, setting the stage for future problems with obesity.
hey may also consider having companions or supervision for more dangerous activities like swimming.
o said that being too cautious carried its own risks, possibly resulting in "social isolation, physical inactivity and psychological dependency."
eter chilperoort, president of the association, said headgear prevented bumps and cuts previously suffered by his players, calling the equipment "the best thing since sliced bread."
very coach should insist on frequent breaks for water and rest in the shade, plan practices for early or late in the day and avoid use of full uniforms in hot weather.
he sweat-stained felt hats worn by ustralian cowboys, as much a part of the utback as kangaroos and sun-baked soil, may be heading for the history books.
t all stems from the death of a cowboy, who suffered massive head injuries after being trampled in a fall from a horse while mustering bulls in uly 2001.
is sole protection was the tattered hat provided him for shading from the sun.
anch manager icholas nnis told investigators he knew of no ranch in ustralia that made cowboys wear helmets except while mustering on motorbikes.
ince the tragedy at the ranch in erriwagga, about 500 kilometers (300 miles) west of ydney, helmets have become compulsory for working in the saddle there, but ranchers are calling for industrial laws to be changed to reflect the differences between working in the utback and in a city factory.
 new study from orway adds smoking and eating salty food to the list of habits that can lead to chronic acid reflux.
ince the tragedy, the dead cowboy's father, eil roker, has become a campaigner for safer work practices on farms.
" think we can still have that fantasy of romantic, wild west-type attitude but with safety added on," roker told ustralian roadcasting orp. radio
he story is that the disease started when an ancestor fell into cold water.
iliana chegaray said most people don't appreciate the danger posed by reckless driving.
uthorities are also using cameras to catch traffic violations at key intersections.
. tephen asscles, the counsel to en. illiam . arkin, r., a epublican from the udson alley, said the senator pushed the issue after a police chief in his district raised concerns about the safety of child skateboarders who mimic stunts from video games.
any of the city's drivers weave erratically between lanes and routinely ignore red lights and stop signs.
he said the study, published online in he roceedings of the ational cademy of ciences, offered support to arwin's theory that emotions are useful in an evolutionary sense because they predispose us to actions that increase the chance of survival.
"hese are five important elements that can be effective and that are not expensive to implement," urg said.
till pictures of these, with the actors' faces blurred out, were presented to seven test subjects while their brains were scanned with equipment to detect what regions of the brain were being activated.
he headgear gained international visibility during the 2003 omen's orld up and the thens lympics.
hen  got hit one time, maybe it gave me a little extra cushion."
"here are you going to draw the line?
urther, from half to three-fourths of sports-related concussions are never even diagnosed; the injured are often sent back into play too soon and put at risk of another more serious brain-damaging concussion.
ow, fewer than 10 percent of the 2.5 million volunteer coaches and 33 percent of the interscholastic coaches receive any type of coaching education, the ational outh ports afety oundation reports.
n arch, in a lacrosse game at ornell niversity, a shot by a inghamton player struck ornell's defenseman eorge oiardi above the heart, killing him.
ad oslet's coaches been well informed about this hazard and paid closer attention to him, the outcome would probably have been different.
uch symptoms warranted a closer look at his cardiovascular system by a knowledgeable doctor.
t 46, keen possesses the righteousness of the aggrieved parent.
everal models are available at prices ranging from $24 to $39.
he device is made of shock-absorbing foam situated between an outer layer of ycra and an inner layer of sweat-absorbing polypropylene.
he founder of a an iego-based company called ull90 said he has sold 100,000 headgear, which resemble an enlarged headband, weigh less than 2 ounces, and cover the forehead, temples and occipital bone in back of the head.
t makes no sense," grumbled taxi driver duardo atorre, adding he had not seen such a zealous seat belt campaign in 17 years of navigating through the capital's chaotic streets.
ushing children to play too early or to take part in a sport chosen by the parents can backfire.
  details,  quotes ///
ss problems with the way transportation is organized, factors contributing to accidents, the need to create better safety devices for vehicles and passengers and to build a better mechanism to respond to accidents, urg said.
"hese are all estimates, the numbers are possibly underestimated (by hina), and maybe overestimated by the ," urg told .
"he side effects of these road accidents is that families are driven into poverty as most of the victims are the breadwinners of their families," said ichard curfield, head of the orld ank's transportation sector.
n estimated 300,000 athletes experience exercise-related heat illnesses each year, and almost all of them should have been avoided.
ll can impair normal growth and development and, in the long run, their basic health.
e added: " can't tell you if it was a huge help.
arol oslet reports that her grandson was constantly short of breath after physical activity, that he was intolerant of the summer heat at football camp and that he felt faint during a football practice.
f something makes you comfortable, why not?"
oung athletes should be asked about occurrences of chest pain on exertion, passing out during physical activity and excessive shortness of breath or fatigue in exercise.
hy wouldn't you start protecting people?"
ne of the study's authors, r. al offman of the niversity of alifornia at an iego, estimates that about 300 people, most in the nited tates, suffer from the disorder, familial cold autoinflammatory syndrome, or , which is caused by a single genetic mutation.
any in uenos ires praised the enforcement effort.
e said he developed the protective device after his daughter auren suffered two soccer-related concussions in high school, causing her to quit the sport.
layers might develop a false sense of security, relying on headgear instead of proper medical evaluation after suffering a concussion, federation doctors say.
inally, the consistent use of proper-fitting and well-maintained protective athletic equipment is a must for every young athlete.
t appears likely that most of the cases stem from a single immigrant in the 1600s, he said, although a few result from more recent mutations.
nson orrance, who has coached 18 women's national championship teams at orth arolina, also sponsored by ull90, said compulsory use of shin guards had not changed the nature of soccer, as many feared.
 half-hour session of strenuous physical activity once a week or more, and regular consumption of high-fiber bread both appeared to cut the risk of reflux in half, the study said.
"aybe this would be a good measure on the open highway where it would save lives, but not in uenos ires."
hough word of the drug's effectiveness has spread, only a few use it regularly, offman said.
n the 15 months since , soccer's world governing body, began permitting its use, headgear has been used by thousands of merican players from youth leagues to high school to colleges to the pros.
laying surfaces should be well maintained and someone well trained in emergency medical services should be onsite at games and practice sessions.
ith proper training, supervision, protective equipment and techniques, and an appropriate emphasis on winning, sports can foster a healthy body and spirit and a lifelong interest in being active and fit.
 calls on hina to lower 680-a-day road accident death toll
r. yle icheli, director of the sports medicine clinic at hildren's ospital oston, suggests starting with an emphasis on athletic technique, and only when that is mastered should power or speed be addressed.
he law, which has been in force since 1997, requires all occupants of cars, including taxis, to wear seatbelts.
"hey are trying to thwart the evolution of headgear in soccer because they think it will scare soccer moms away from the sign-up table," keen said of soccer federation officials.
alvin illiams, founder of the angaroo headgear company, said he thought soccer officials resisted the equipment because they felt "it is sissified."
e elder said the brain might react more powerfully to emotions signaled through body language than to faces because faces also convey other information, like personal identity, that could slow down mental processing in a moment of danger.
ut most serious hazards are preventable.
ederation officials compare the use of soccer headgear, which lack an industry safety standard, to the largely unregulated business of nutritional supplements.
t found that only 39 of them suffered seizure-related injuries and that most of them were minor, usually bruises to the head.
n a study, published in the linical ournal of ports edicine, elaney questioned 380 anadian university football players and 240 university soccer players as they reported to fall training camp in 1999.
ith the new crackdown, motorists were hastily buckling up to avoid fines of up to 500 pesos ($175, euro140), said highway safety officer abian ente.
ut the company does say the headgear can reduce, by up to 50 percent, the peak impact forces that occur during typical collisions when a player's head strikes another head, the ground, an elbow or a goal post.
requency of seizures was the strongest predictor of injury, he said.
hose at higher risk should work with their doctors to bring their seizures under the tightest possible control, he said.
ustavo oglio predicted the crackdown would cause more people to buckle up to avoid being fined.
fficial hinese statistics, however, say that around 104,000 people died in traffic accidents in the country in each of the years 2002 and 2003, an average of about 285 people a day.
"ut what we do know is that the problem is very big, that hina has the highest rate in the world and the number of deaths is going up very rapidly."
hey also vowed to commit to raise the safety standards on  roads, identify the most dangerous sections on the  road networks and implement systematic programs for accident prevention.
olice handed out 2,184 tickets on onday alone to unbuckled drivers and passengers, the first day of the crackdown.
peeding and drunken driving also contribute to the country's high death rate, ilveira said.
 ransport inisters issued a ministerial declaration on  road safety uesday to enhance the road safety and reduce the traffic casualties in member countries.
he declaration was issued at the 10th  ransport inisters eeting held here on uesday.
"e have given these people enough time.
ut none did when given an injection of anakinra before a second chilling.
he law was firstly supposed to start on ct. 1, 2004.
his is the second extension of the traffic regulations.
asasira told press on hursday that the new deadline expires at the end of the month.
odesh said he uses a helmet and kneepads only when he goes to a special skate park, and said he has suffered, "some broken bones but no major injuries, thank goodness."
irst, three women with the disorder were monitored after they sat in a 36-degree room for 45 minutes.
 careful family and personal history, with a well-done physical exam, can help detect these problems early.
he other death, of a freshman wrestler named raham orin in ovember 2000, was a result of a rare, previously undetected heart disorder called hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
 number of cardiac problems can result in sudden death in a young athlete, including myocarditis (an inflammation of the heart), mitral valve prolapse, long  syndrome and arfan syndrome.
n each case, if an automatic external defibrillator had been available and used within four minutes of the athlete's collapse, there was a good chance that he would have been saved, with his brain intact.
" 30 mile-per-hour crash, a fender bender, it helps.
tudies have presented contradictory results, and the matter remains disputed as the soccer federation undertakes a long-term examination of head injuries.
xercise-induced heat illness can be devastating, especially for those who start football practice in late summer.
offee and alcohol, along with favorites like chocolate and spicy foods, can still bring on symptoms in reflux patients even if they play no role in its development, said the researcher, r. agnus ilsson of the arolinska nstitute in tockholm.
lacing excessive physical and psychological demands on children that they are unable or unwilling to handle can turn them off activities for life.
ilsson said that other research conducted by his team showed that people with reflux and people worried about developing it would both also benefit from losing excess weight.
eople who ate a lot of salted fish and meat  traditional foods in the area  and those who always added salt at meals were significantly more likely to develop reflux than those who never did.
till, he warned the initiative wouldn't necessarily lead to more responsible driving.
ews outh ales armers' ssociation president al eters warned that substituting helmets for broad-brimmed hats would increase the hazards of skin cancer and heat stroke.
he bulk of the injuries occurred among people with the most serious cases: those with uncontrolled seizures, with generalized convulsions or drop attacks, or those who had suffered injuries in falls in the past, according one of the study's authors, r. lson . o of the ayo linic.
he study found that coffee, alcohol and tea appear to have no effect on the odds of developing the disorder, which is marked by heartburn and frequent regurgitation, while exercise and high-fiber bread appeared to offer some protection.
e found that 70.4 percent of the football players and 62.7 percent of the soccer players had experienced symptoms of a concussion in the previous year.
ut it was rarely enforced until the campaign began onday.
athy onaboy, ill's mother, said she held no illusion that her daughter, who has suffered two concussions, would never be hurt again while wearing a headgear.
lberto ilveira, president of a road-safety advocacy group, said he welcomed the crackdown on violators, but feared the enforcement effort might not last.
nother potentially disastrous injury, paralysis from the neck down, can result from the use of an improper technique in football tackles.
oth the emecula and e nza clubs are sponsored by ull90.
ny club or association that makes headgear compulsory risks losing its affiliation with the .. occer ederation, r. . obert ontiguglia, its president, said.
thers said risk was inherent in any sport.
occer federation officials disagree, saying their caution is based on scientific uncertainty.
ut they did accomplish one thing that will have far-reaching implications for young daredevils: passing a law requiring that children under 14 wear safety helmets while riding skateboards in public areas.
"'m on the fence," said aule, who was not paid to endorse the headgear.
nfortunately for coffee or wine lovers who already suffer from reflux, the study's lead researcher said the findings did not mean a green light for their consumption.
ome can't afford it  it's not covered by most insurance  and others prefer to continue to bundle up.
"his is because many skateboard riders practice dangerous stunts and flips on flat surfaces or walls."
ut ex-cowboy ayden ostock blamed apathy in the ranching industry for inadequate safety equipment for cowboys.
ut  expect over time, you will see it broadly accepted."
n one side of the headgear argument is eff keen, founder of ull90.
or a first violation, a skateboard rider would be warned of the need for a helmet, but on subsequent violations, the rider's parent or guardian could be fined up to $50, said evin . uinn, a spokesman for the governor, who noted that judges would have discretion.
e believes his product can reduce head injuries without giving an illicit advantage in heading the ball.
"'m a transportation specialist and  have worked with (hina's) inistry of ommunications to jointly try to tackle the road safety issue, but  think that my colleagues agree with me that we weren't very successful," curfield, who lived and worked in hina for many years, said.
ictims have included the uchess of ork's mother, usan arrantes, killed in a 1998 car accident in rgentina.
hen an athlete overtrains, the risk of overuse injuries increases sharply.
ather than headgear, federation officials advocate better technique, stricter rules enforcement and improved officiating to reduce the number of head injuries.
yclists and football players can reduce their risks by wearing helmets; hockey players by wearing masks; basketball and tennis players by wearing eye guards; baseball players by wearing batting helmets.
any of these motorcyclist casualties could be avoided if there was widespread wearing of safety helmets.
" don't agree it should be mandated.
ven though colds are called colds, most people know that viruses are to blame, not the temperature.
"kateboards can be at least as dangerous to ride as bicycles or in-line skates," according to a legislative memorandum in support of the bill.
his year, police are continuing a crackdown against motorcyclists riding without helmets.
"e've shown concussions are a problem and in the lab these things work," elaney said of headgear.
he resolution of these head-related issues could have far-reaching health and financial impact, given that nearly 18 million people play soccer in the nited tates.
ut a small group of people come down with fevers when they experience chills, according to an article published aturday in he ancet, the medical journal.
he study, published in the journal eurology, examined the medical records of 247 epilepsy patients who were followed for an average of 10 years.
he ew outh ales state government brought charges against the ranch owner, who employed 23-year-old aniel roker, convicting and fining the company 95,000 ustralian dollars ($72,000; euro56,000) last month for breaches of safety, including failure to provide the horseman with an equestrian helmet.
osh abinowitz, the publisher of the kateboardirectory.com skateboard directory and search engine, said he saw the law chipping away at civil liberties and parents' rights to raise their children the way they want to.
e sure that your child has the desire, strength, coordination and ability to perform the activity and that the coach is able to teach the skills.
he result can be a permanent paralyzing compression injury to the cervical spine.
" seat belt is not going to save a life in a 90-mile-per hour crash into a wall," athy onaboy said.
ll three developed fevers and rashes in the hours that followed.
ou can't replace it with an ice-cream container on the head," ostock said.
ikewise for yan oslet who died at 17 in ebruary 2003, during football drills in the high school gym in lpharetta, a. is grandmother, arol oslet of nnapolis, d., is campaigning for improved physicals for teenage athletes before they take part in sports and better education, especially among coaches and trainers.
long with their symptoms, the patients also share a common family folklore.
une in to the signs of overtraining: he child's performance may slack off, motivation to practice may be lacking and the child may tire easily or become irritable or unwilling to cooperate.
 group of 3,153 people who reported reflux were compared with 40,210 people who reported no significant symptoms.
lthough children today are generally more sedentary than ever before, more youngsters are involved in organized sports and at ever-younger ages.
"or a farmer who's mustering a mob of sheep, moving very slowly behind them without any air circulation, he or his employee may be subject to heat stroke," eters said.
ut those fears appear to be overblown, a new ayo linic study concludes.
"he stockman's hat is an icon of ustralia.
he new study tested an arthritis drug, anakinra, which blocks the effect of a protein that is part of the chain of reactions identified in the cold syndrome.
he association later retreated over concerns about liability and protests from some coaches and officials.
wo years ago, thousands of music fans gathered to mourn the death of pop music star odrigo ueno, killed in a car crash near uenos ires.
"t's like a flag that reminds you not to go up for stupid plays," said ill onaboy, a defender at owningtown est igh in suburban hiladelphia, who wore a headgear last weekend as her team won the ennsylvania lass  state championship.
r, they say, players might feel invincible in headgear and play with reckless aggressiveness, displaying behavior known as the uperman effect.
said om aines, who coaches an under-10 boys team in rockport, ..
"e require protecting of the shin, and the head is a far more precious part of the body than the shin," ridham said.
ashion aside, oss aule, a midfielder for the olumbus rew of ajor eague occer, wore a ull90 headgear for a dozen games in the recently completed season, seeking some security after suffering three earlier concussions.
ithout such measures, childhood sports can lead to disillusionment, injuries and even paralysis or death.
o track the disease, offman visited reunions of families carrying the affliction.
"eing a bushman myself, we're not going to wear anything that doesn't look any good."
e advises people with epilepsy outside the high-risk category to take basic safety measures like wearing helmets while biking.
ost soccer players on the anta lara niversity women's team will enter the  quarterfinals on aturday wearing protective equipment  headgear  that is as controversial as it is lightweight.
"t's very typical here that authorities announce a campaign for something ... and after a few days all is forgotten," said ilveira, who heads the group "et's ight or ife."
ew ork state's politicians have been accused of leaving most major legislative business unfinished this year.
"here is no evidence headgear are going to help, and some theoretical stuff that it could hurt," said r. ary reen, a clinical professor at the  division of sports medicine and a member of the soccer federation's medical advisory committee.
or the study, actors were asked to depict scary situations like opening a door and finding a robber, along with happy or emotionally neutral ones like pouring water.
ecause ull90 pays some pro players (the equivalent of $50 to $100 per game, it says) and some state soccer associations ($4,000 to $10,000) to endorse its product, the soccer federation says the company's claims are suspect.
"e're talking about marketing and fear and manipulation," said r. ert andelbaum, team physician for the .. national teams.
hat she hopes, she said, is that a blow that might have caused a third concussion will result in only a bruise.
ew people would question the value of participating in sports for young people.
n editorial accompanying the article noted that a loosening of restrictions for drivers with epilepsy had not been accompanied by noticeably higher accident rates.
ven in the best circumstances, no activity can be risk-free.
nother hazard is overtraining, often from pressures to win when the goals should be fun, fitness, friendship and sportsmanship.
ome also recommend mouth guards and padded goal posts instead of padded headgear.
" remember when baseball players didn't wear batting helmets," said teve yan, commissioner of the ajor ndoor occer eague, which approves of headgear.
ccording to a survey by sian evelopment ank (), otorcyclists and pedestrians are by far the biggest proportion of those killed or injured.
hina's growing love with the autocar has resulted in its car market growing by up to 80 percent in 2003 to the world's fourth largest, but which on the street has meant increasingly treacherous roads jammed with inexperienced and unsafe drivers.
eorge . ataki signed on ov. 16, mirrors the state laws already in place to protect bicycle riders and those who use in-line skates against serious head injuries.
ot all medical soccer experts oppose headgear.
"he biggest complaint of  patients is air-conditioned rooms."
e likens the doubt of soccer officials to familiar but failed arguments once made against the use of bicycle helmets, automobile seat belts and soccer shin guards.
oreover, the ministers agreed to foster the development of a new culture of road safety among citizens especially the young, school-age or child population.
he study, published on hursday in ut, a journal of the ritish edical ssociation, was based on two surveys, carried out a decade apart, that included the bulk of the population of a rural county in central orway.
"'d challenge any of these doctors who feel this has no value to run into the goalpost without a ull90 and with it, then tell me, if they were forced to do it a third time, whether or not they would wear it," orrance said.
"e rgentines are just like that, we fly through the air," he said.
rad . odesh, president of the 1skateboards.com eb site, which sells skateboard equipment, said he did not think the law was necessary, because "ultimately,  think, wearing a helmet is the rider's decision; it should be enforced by the parents."