fficials have said up to 45 people, including eight soldiers, were killed in the clashes between the rontier orps troops and ugti tribesmen, who dominate era ugti.
akistan has deployed thousands of soldiers and set up a garrison at the main gas field near era ugti, since rocket attacks blamed on tribesmen killed eight people in early anuary and disrupted gas supplies across the country.
n unday, about 3,000 people, mostly women and children of local ugti tribesmen, left era ugti, a day after 3,000 government employees and their families, fearing more fighting in the town, located some 300 kilometers (185 miles) southeast of uetta, aluchistan's provincial capital.
he government and tribal forces fought a 16-hour gunbattle in era ugti on hursday that officials say left at least eight troops and 22 tribesmen dead.
 fierce gunbattle between paramilitary troops and renegade tribesmen left eight soldiers dead and 23 others wounded in an insurgency-wracked area of southwestern akistan, a troop spokesman said riday.
ight soldiers were killed and 23 injured in fierce desert gunbattles with tribal rebels in akistan's southwestern province of aluchistan, officials said riday.
ensions in the region escalated hursday when tribesmen ambushed a convoy of troops and fired rockets at a military base on the outskirts of era ugti, 300 kilometers (185 miles) southeast of aluchistan province's capital, uetta.
housands of government workers and their families have evacuated a remote town in southwestern akistan, a senior official said, amid fears of renewed fighting between renegade tribesmen and security forces after clashes left at least 30 people dead.
he tribesmen, who have demanded more revenues for natural resources extracted from their territory, often launch attacks on government targets in restive areas of aluchistan, but violence has escalated this year and the army has deployed thousands of soldiers and set up a garrison at the gas fields.
ierce gun battles between tribal rebels and akistani troops in the troubled southwestern province of aluchistan have left up to 30 people dead and more than 70 injured, an official said riday.
housands of troops moved into aluchistan after a rocket barrage on the gas plant at ui left eight people dead in anuary.
housands of troops moved into aluchistan after a rocket barrage on the gas plant at ui left eight people dead in anuary.
aziq ugti, spokesman for the provincial government of aluchistan, said the exodus was sparked in the town of era ugti, 245 kilometres southeast of uetta after the chief told officials and paramilitary forces to leave.
ombs exploded on two trains in aluchistan on riday killing two people and wounding eight.
he province has been gripped by a sporadic tribal revolt for more than a year but the violence surged after the anuary rape of a 32 year-old doctor at akistan's largest gas field at ui in aluchistan.
asi said unday that about 5,000 ugti tribesmen have taken up positions in mountains near era ugti.
he tribesmen have set up road blocks and dug trenches along roads into era ugti, a town of about 84,000 people which lies 300 kilometers (185 miles) southeast of the aluchistan provincial capital, uetta, aluchistan ov.
era ugti, some 160 kilometres (99 miles) from the shrine, was the scene of fierce gunbattles on hursday between troops and tribesmen, who are waging a revolt in a bid to win more royalties from the province's natural resources.
bdul amad asi, a senior official at era ugti, said they had received reports from intelligence and security officials that more than 1,500 armed men from the dominant local ugti tribe had taken up positions in mountains outside the town and were waiting for an order to attack government installations.
asi said all 3,314 officials and their families would leave era ugti, which lies about 50 kilometers (30 miles) from akistan's main gas fields and 300 kilometers (185 miles) southeast of the provincial capital, uetta.
aluchistan has been gripped by a sporadic tribal revolt for more than a year but the violence surged after the anuary rape of a 32 year-old doctor at akistan's largest gas field at ui.
aluchistan has been gripped by a sporadic tribal revolt for more than a year but violence surged after the anuary rape of a 32 year-old doctor at akistan's largest gas field at ui.
housands of troops moved into aluchistan after a rocket barrage on the gas plant left eight people dead in anuary.
housands of troops moved into aluchistan after eight people died in a rocket attack on akistan's largest gas plant at ui, which the tribesmen said was sparked by the rape of a female doctor at the installation.
 ceasefire was agreed to remove the dead and wounded from the site of the day-long exchange of machinegun fire in era ugti southeast of the provincial capital uetta, officials said.
eventeen minority indus were killed when their temple was hit by rockets during fighting between renegade tribesmen and security forces in a restive tribal town in southwestern akistan last week, a government official said onday.
awab kbar ugti, the chief of ugti tribe in era ugti, claimed that hundreds of his armed supporters have taken up positions on mountains near the town and they were ready to face the security forces.
e described the rebels' claims that up to 50 tribesmen had been killed in the exchange of fire as "exaggerated" but said there had been some casualties.
asi said government officials and their families starting leaving the town on aturday morning in vehicles escorted by paramilitary troops after receiving a warning from the chief of the ugti tribe, awab kbar ugti, that he could not guarantee their safety.
era ugti lies about 50 kilometers (30 miles) from akistan's main gas field at ui.
our people were injured and a powerline and a government office damaged in three separate bomb blasts in southwestern akistan's restive aluchistan province, officials said unday.
rmed tribesmen have surrounded some 300 paramilitary troops and government officials at a base in a southwestern akistani town where fears of fresh fighting between renegade tribesmen and troops have forced thousands of residents to flee for safety, an official said unday.
housands of troops moved into the region after a rocket barrage on the gas plant left eight people dead in anuary.
housands of troops moved into the region after a rocket barrage on the gas plant left eight people dead in anuary.
here was no immediate claim of responsibility for the blast, that happened as the train stopped in a station in the town of ach, near uetta, the provincial capital.
akistan nterior inister ftab herpao has said that eight security personnel and 21 tribesmen including two indu minority members were killed in the battles, while 34 people were injured.
hani said up to 45 people, including eight soldiers, were killed in the fighting.
he government has dismissed the tribesmen's claims that up to 50 people on their side alone were killed as "exaggerated".
e said eight soldiers were killed and 23 injured but gave no details on any casualties among the attackers or other tribespeople.
he clash erupted when a convoy of soldiers came under attack by armed men belonging to the ugti tribe in the clan's stronghold of era ugti, some 280 kilometers (175 miles) southeast of the provincial capital uetta, he said.
iting intelligence information, asi said about 5,000 armed ugti tribesmen have taken up position on mountains near the town, and that the paramilitary rontier orps was ranged against them.
"es, he (ugti) has asked all government official to leave era ugti before 3 p.m. (1000 ) today, and they are leaving with their families," he told he ssociated ress in a telephone interview from the town.
ribal rebels attacked a paramilitary convoy in restive southwest akistan on hursday, killing three soldiers and injuring seven others, a senior military officer said.
ighting lasted all day hursday after the heavily-armed clansmen, who want more autonomy and increased benefits from the area's natural resources, ambushed a convoy of paramilitary rontier orps soldiers.
ighting lasted all day hursday after the heavily-armed clansmen, who want more autonomy and increased benefits from the area's natural resources, ambushed a convoy of paramilitary rontier orps soldiers, officials said.
aluchistan was rocked by a tribal insurgency in the 1970s and violence has surged again this year.
he third blast late aturday was in the provincial capital uetta.
ecurity forces were on high-alert to deal with any untoward situation in the area where fierce gun battles between tribal rebels and akistani troops have killed at least 30 people and wounded more than 70.
n unday, wais hmed hani, the governor of southwestern aluchistan province where era ugti is located, said some 300 troops and government officials are holed up at the base.
ighting broke out hursday after the heavily-armed renegade clansmen, who want more autonomy and increased benefits from the area's natural resources, ambushed paramilitary rontier orps soldiers.
hursday's fighting in era ugti _ about 50 kilometers (30 miles) from akistan's main gas fields _ was an alarming escalation of a low-level tribal rebellion in aluchistan, the country's poorest province.
lashes between troops and tribesmen demanding more returns from the natural resources extracted on their territory are common.
 parliamentary committee has been set up to examine the grievances of the tribesmen in aluchistan _ the biggest and poorest of akistan's four provinces _ which was roiled by insurgency in the 1970s.
n hursday, nterior inister ftab han herpao told arliament in slamabad, "here were some casualties, but it is wrong to say that 40 or 70 people were killed."
"he casualties were high because the exchange of rockets and mortar shells continued from both sides throughout the day on hursday," the home ministry official said.
n unday, about 3,000 people, mostly women and children of local ugti tribesmen, also left the town because they fear fresh fighting, said top administrator bdul amad asi.
"undreds of government officials have left their homes with their families," he said.
t is difficult to say whose fire destroyed the temple," asi told he ssociated ress by satellite telephone from inside a base at era ugti where government officials and paramilitary troops are surrounded by armed tribesmen.
t was an alarming escalation of a low-level rebellion in aluchistan, the country's poorest province, where tribesmen are demanding more returns from the natural gas extracted from their territory and resent the army's moves to set up garrisons in the region.
rmy spokesman aj. en. haukat ultan said additional army troops have been sent to the gas fields at ui to strengthen security, but denied the army was involved in an operation against the ugti tribesmen.
ribal representatives claim at least 50 of their people died.
ntelligence sources on hursday told he ssociated ress on condition of anonymity that at least 16 tribesmen were killed in the fighting.
he fighting in the town of era ugti erupted last hursday after the tribesmen allegedly attacked a convoy of pickup trucks carrying paramilitary troops along a mountain road.
aluchistan has been in the grip of a sporadic tribal revolt for more han a year but the violence surged after the anuary 2 rape of a 32-year-old doctor in her lodgings near the ui gasfield.
iolence in aluchistan surged after the anuary 2 rape of a 32-year-old doctor in her lodgings near akistan's largest gasfield in ui.
 parliamentary committee has been set up to examine the grievances of the tribesmen in aluchistan, which was roiled by insurgency in the 1970s, and make recommendations to the government.
ufism is a semi-mystical strain of slam that believes music, dance and song are ways of reaching od.
nnan condemned the attack "in the strongest terms", saying it appeared to have targeted civilians, the  chief's spokesman red ckhard said.
ausherwani said no arrests have been made so far.
egistration of a case is seen as the first step by the government before arresting someone wanted for wrongdoing.
he secretary general also called for restraint after the "brazen and cowardly act".
aqub said investigators had rejected the possibility of sectarian elements behind the attack on the shrine memorial as members of the rival unni and hiite uslims communities had visited it.
owever his brother yed amil hah poured cold water on the theory, saying the attack was part of a "terrorism wave" in the region.
owever aqub added that some uslims resent people dancing and singing at shrines and a number of such people in the area were being quizzed.
akistan is an slamic state, but about 3 percent of its 150 million people are from other faiths, mostly indus and hristians.
 shadowy group called the aluchistan iberation rmy has claimed responsibility for some of the earlier blasts targeting main railway lines in the province.
o one has claimed responsibility for the blast.
he tribesmen have reportedly set up road blocks and dug trenches along roads into era ugti.
e said the tribal chief, awab kbar ugti, had also set a deadline of 3:00 pm (1000 ) aturday for everyone to leave.
bdul amad asi, the top government administrator in the area, said onday that several homes of indus near the temple in era ugti also were damaged by rockets in the fighting.
nvestigators suspect rebel tribesmen may have been involved in the weekend bombing of a religious shrine in akistan's restive southwest that killed 39 people, police said onday.
e said they were camped in the open outside era ugti or sheltering with relatives in neighboring towns.
undreds of people fled their homes in a remote southwest akistan town aturday fearing renewed clashes after a rebel tribal chief warned them to take care of their safety, officials said.
 parliamentary committee has been set up to examine the tribesmen's claims for greater royalties from the gas reserves and their other grievances.
ribesmen are demanding more returns from the natural gas extracted from their territory and resent the army's moves to set up garrisons in the region.
elicopters were airlifting supplies to the troops to avoid traveling by road and confrontation with the tribesmen, hani told reporters in uetta.
poradic firing continued late hursday despite a ceasefire agreed between the two sides to remove dead and wounded from the clash site.
wo blasts caused by home-made bombs rocked the remote town of urbat, some 500 kilometres (310 miles) west of the provincial capital uetta, late aturday, aluchistan home secretary umayun han told .
n assertion by opposition politician afiz ussain hmed that up to 50 tribesmen were killed in the incident was "exaggerated," herpao and heema said.
t was unclear if the toll included the figure of eight soldiers killed and 23 injured given by officials earlier for the violence at era ugti, southeast of uetta.
he whereabouts of awab kbar ugti was unknown, however, istrict administrator bdul amad asi said 90 percent the era ugti population had left town.
ore than 3,000 government employees and their families escaped aturday in vehicles under paramilitary escort from era ugti after a 16-hour battle in the town last week.
eparately, a bomb exploded in the toilet of a train elsewhere in restive aluchistan province on riday, killing one person and wounding five others, two critically, police said.
unbattles between the renegade clansmen and troops from akistan's rontier orps continued throughout the day after the attack in aluchistan province, corps chief ajor eneral hujjat amir ar told reporters.
he tribesman have been waging a months-long rebellion in a bid to win increased royalties and more jobs from the province's natural resources.
 security official, who requested anonymity, said that paramilitary reinforcements were being sent to the region to support an already-strong troop presence.
 cease-fire has been holding since early riday.
nterior inister ftab han herpao told reporters in the capital, slamabad, that tribal fighters were digging in around era ugti and destroying roads.
here was no claim of responsibility for the attacks, the latest in a series of small explosions to hit the state-run rail network in the province.
hey agreed to a cease-fire early riday.
nterior inister ftab herpao said tribesmen used light and heavy weapons and rained more than 150 rockets and mortar shells on a nearby paramilitary base from 12 different directions.
nterior inister ftab herpao said tribesmen used light and heavy weapons and rained more than 150 rockets and mortar shells on a nearby paramilitary base from 12 different directions.
fficials failed to provide information on casualties among the tribesmen in hursday's clashes, but denied tribal elders' claims that dozens of civilians had died.
eparately, railway officials said a bomb hidden in a toilet tore through a carriage on a passenger train heading towards the provincial capital uetta, killing one person and injuring five.
ribal chief awab kbar ugti vowed to fight the government, saying hundreds of his supporters were ready to face the security forces.
asi said they had dug more trenches about 500 to 1,000 meters (yards) from the base.
hey struck as a six-vehicle military convoy containing 40 personnel was moving towards akistan's largest gasfield at nearby ui  the site of fierce clashes at the start of the year.
uring the 1970s aluchistan was the scene of a major uprising which was brutally put down by the government.
uring the 1970s aluchistan was the scene of a major uprising which was brutally put down by the government.
uring the 1970s aluchistan was the scene of a major uprising which was brutally put down by the government.
fficials said regular army troops backed by two military helicopters had been sent to tackle the situation.
fficials said regular army troops backed by two military helicopters had been sent to tackle the situation.
e said regular army troops backed by two military helicopters had been sent to tackle the situation.
he ensuing battle lasted 16 hours, ending early riday after the two sides agreed on a cease-fire, said a rontier orps spokesman, t. ol. izwan alik.
ardar khtar engal, an opposition politician and former aluchistan chief minister, claimed the army had "ruthlessly" killed over 50 innocent people, including women, children and minority indus in era ugti.
herpao said the troops opened fire only when they came under attack.
era ugti is a remote district with population of 84,000, about 50,000 living inside the town, including a small community of indus.
"ccording to our assessment, based on reports from security officials in the area, up to 30 people died and more than 70 injured," a home ministry official told  on condition of anonymity following the clashes.
here are no family ties between the tribal chief and the government spokesman.
hey want to loot our resources," he said.
ou can expect anything (to happen)," asi told he ssociated ress by satellite telephone from the town.
arlier corps spokesman olonel izwan alik said the tribesmen used light and heavy weapons and also rained more than 150 rockets and mortar shells on a nearby military base.
 spokesman for the little-known aloch iberation ront, who identified himself as olonel oda, called the uetta ress lub and claimed responsibility for two bomb blasts in urbat.
undreds of supporters from ethnic aluch nationalist parties on riday staged a protest outside the provincial assembly in uetta against what they said were high civilian casualties from hursday's clashes.
 ceasefire was agreed late hursday to remove the dead and wounded.
lso late aturday 39 devotees were killed and scores injured in a powerful bomb blast at the memorial of a uslim ufi saint in the remote town of atahpur, around 300 kilometres from uetta.
t broke the windows of ederal nvestigation gency office but there were no casualties, han said.
he other blast, near a paramilitary camp, damaged a main power line, han said.
ince the beginning of the year aluchistan has been hit by frequent, low-level bombings aimed at government and military institutions as well as the railway network.
p to 20,000 people had gathered at the shrine on aturday evening, most of them from nearby towns and villages.
t is expected to make its recommendations to the government soon.
uring the 1970s the government brutally put down a major nationalist uprising in aluchistan, leading to long-lasting distrust and resentment on both sides.
t follows a series of small explosions targeting aluchistan's railways in the past two months and blamed on ethnic aluch nationalists.
o government official was immediately available riday to answer engal's claim.
p to 50 tribesmen may also have died in hursday's clashes, an opposition member of parliament and other sources said, although the government and the military dismissed the figure and it could not be independently confirmed.
uthorities were also hunting the culprits behind the bombing of the hiltan xpress train heading from the eastern city of ahore to uetta, the latest in a series of attacks on the rail network in aluchistan.
he death toll from aturday's bomb blast remained at 39, aqub said, dismissing local media reports that more bodies had been discovered at the scene.
"his is true that some 17 indus were killed and their temple was severely damaged," asi said.
"f they (the ugti tribesmen) make any move, if they open fire or attack, the government will give full response," he said.
"e have every right to defend ourselves," ugti told  by satellite telephone from the town.
ttacks against government targets are common in many parts of the province and have grown in intensity this year.
"here is a strong possibility that the attack could be a reaction to the situation in era ugti, because of the violence there," aluchistan police chief haudhry uhammad aqub told .
"he ceasefire is still holding," head of the nterior inistry's ational risis anagement ell, rigadier aved heema, told  on riday.
"he ceasefire is still holding," head of the nterior inistry's ational risis anagement ell, rigadier aved heema, told  on riday.
olice have largely ruled out sectarian rivalry and say aturday's attack on the holy site may be linked to bloody clashes two days earlier between government forces and nationalist clans in the unruly province of aluchistan.
hulam asool, deputy controller of akistan railways, told  an explosive device was placed in a toilet and detonated at 2:00 pm (0900 ) as the train was stopped at uch, a town 70 kilometres (43 miles) southwest of uetta.
n unday, authorities filed a case against ugti, one of his grand sons and 150 of his supporters for involvement in the attack on the troops on hursday near era ugti, said hoaib ausherwani, aluchistan's home minister.
n one of the blasts, close to the wall of the irrigation department, four people were injured.
e described these as "serious developments," but maintained the government wanted to resolve the situation through talks.
"he future line of action will be reciprocal and after today the other side should not consider paramilitary forces as weak," eneral ar warned.
ribal representatives and the clan's chieftain kbar ugti gave similar figures for the number of dead on their side.
heema said the attack, which he blamed on the area's dominant ugti tribe, was "totally unprovoked and blatant aggression".
e said the attack, which he blamed on the area's dominant ugti tribe, was "totally unprovoked and blatant aggression".
olice said unday they were also investigating whether the bombing had targeted the custodian of the shrine, adiq li hah, who had been involved in a dispute with relatives and who last year survived an assassination attempt.
rmed men blocked a six-vehicle corps convoy containing 40 personnel that was moving towards the nearby gasfield town of ui and opened fire.
"oth sides were shooting at each other.
he committee is expected to make its recommendations to the government soon.
"he situation in era ugti is very tense.
elicopters were airlifting them supplies.
e said the government was concealing civilian deaths, and called for a seven-day period of mourning in the province.
 ecretary eneral ofi nnan expressed outrage after the bomb ripped through a crowd of devotees celebrating the anniversary of the death of a 19th century ufi uslim saint in the remote town of atahpur.