The suspect, Theodore Kaczynski, a 55-year-old former University of California math instructor, is charged with four of the 16 attacks attributed to the Unabomber, two of which are fatal.
Kaczynski is the suspect of the mailing-bomb terrorist who has killed three people and injured 23 others in the 18 years.
Kaczynski, the 55-year-old former university math instructor is suspected of being the UNABOMber, the mailbomb terrorist who killed three people and injured 23 others in 17 years before his arrest last year.
Justice Department sources said Reno agreed to prosecutors' request and had authorized the death penalty in the case, and said the decision was expected to be disclosed in a court filing later on Thursday in Sacramento, California, where the case is pending.
Kaczynski is charged in Sacramento with four of those bombings, which killed two men and wounded others.
Kaczynski is charged in Sacramento with four of 16 bombings, which killed two men and wounded two others.
WASHINGTON, October 6 (Xinhua) -- Jury selection for the trial of suspected Unabomber Theodore Kaczynski is under way in Sacramento, California, with an unprecedented number of nearly 600 prospective jurors to be interviewed.
Prosecutors say they have a great deal of evidence against the 55-year-old former math professor, who's charged with four of the 16 bombings blamed on the notorious UNABOMber, according to news reports.
Kaczynski, arrested in Montana in April 1996, has pleaded not guilty to the Sacramento charges accusing him of four bomb attacks, in which two people were killed.
Kaczynski, the former Berkeley mathematics professor, has pleaded innocent to four Unabomber attacks that killed two people in Sacramento.
WASHINGTON, July 29 (Xinhua) -- A federal judge has rejected a motion to exclude key evidence from the Sacramento, California trial in November of UNABOMber suspect Theodore J. Kaczynski.
Officials said the 55-year-old former college mathematics instructor had complained of noise in the jail, although they declined to say if that was the reason for the transfer.
WASHINGTON, September 2 (Xinhua) -- The judge in the trial of Unabomber suspect Theodore Kaczynski turned down a series of defense requests for revisions in jury selection.
Attorneys Quin Denvir and Judy Clarke have asked that prospective jurors for the November 12 trial in Sacramento, California, be picked from within the Eastern District, which includes Sacramento and 22 other counties, according to news reports.
Kaczynski, 55, is awaiting trial on November 12 on a 10-count federal indictment charging him with four of the 16 bombings attributed to the Unabomber -- a name stemming from the bomber's early victims, which included universities, airlines and other technology-related targets.
He is charged in Sacramento with placing or mailing four bombs that killed computer store owner Hugh Scrutton in 1985 and timber lobbyist Gilbert Murray in 1995, and with injuring two scientists in the San Francisco Bay area and in Connecticut in 1993.
WASHINGTON, October 3 (Xinhua) -- The names, addresses and employers of jurors and their spouses will be kept secret once the Unabomber murder trial gets under way with jury selection on November 12 in Sacramento, California.
In a statement, Washington, D.C. attorney Anthony Bisceglie said he had informed Kaczynski's brother David and his mother Wanda of Reno's decision to authorize prosecutors to seek the death penalty in the case.
In an order filed late Friday afternoon and distributed by a court document service today, U.S. District Judge Garland Burrell Jr. in Sacramento, California, said defense lawyers Quin Denvir and Judy Clarke had failed to prove the necessity of expanding the jury pool beyond the list of registered voters, media reports said.
He is charged in four bombings that killed two men and wounded two others.
WASHINGTON, November 12 (Xinhua) -- The UNABOMber trial is getting under way today with jury selection in Sacramento, California.
Kaczynski, a 54-year-old former mathematics professor, is accused of being the Unabomber, who killed three people and injured 23 during a campaign against technology between 1978 and 1995.
Kaczynski is also charged with another fatal bombing in a separate case in New Jersey.
Defense lawyers are expected to try to raise reasonable doubt in the minds of jurors that the hermit is the same man who placed or mailed bombs that killed Sacramento computer store owner Hugh Scrutton in 1985, and timber industry lobbyist Gilbert Murray 10 years later.
Burrell said the length of the trial, which is expected to last up to six months, makes it impractical to pursue alternatives to an anonymous jury, including sequestering jurors or moving the trial to another city.
He is charged with a third death in New Jersey.
It is expected that several hundred prospects may be eliminated quickly because the trial and selection process could cause the trial to last for six months, including the jury courtroom selection, which is scheduled to begin November 12.
He also is charged with a third fatal bombing in New Jersey.
He is also charged with a third fatal bombing in New Jersey.
Legal experts say Kaczynski's best hope is escaping the death penalty in the second phase of the trial, if he's convicted, on grounds that he has had lifelong mental problems.
The evidence includes journals that prosecutors say contain admissions to all 16 bombings attributed to the UNABOMber during a 18-year reign of terror that began in 1978.
WASHINGTON, May 15 (Xinhua) -- U.S. Attorney General Janet Reno has authorized prosecutors to seek the death penalty for Unabomber suspect Theodore Kaczynski, Justice Department official and a lawyer for the Kaczynski family said Thursday.
Kaczynski has also pleaded innocent in the case.
Prosecutors have said they hope to decide before January whether to seek the death penalty, which Kaczynski could also face for the two California bombing deaths.
Burrell said the request had to be rejected because the defense had failed to show that using the voter rolls the impact of pretrial news coverage.
The mail bomb terrorist killed three people and injured 23 others in 18 years.
Unabomber, the mail bomb terrorist, killed three people and injured 23 others between 1978 and 1995.
Kacznski is expected to be returned to Sacramento for his trial on November 12.
Kaczynski, who was arrested in April last year, has pleaded innocent to all charges.
Kaczynski was arrested in a cabin in Montana in April last year.
In the first phase, jurors must determine if Kaczynski is the bomber who terrorized the country for 17 years, beginning in 1978.
Prosecutors say they expect to take up to four weeks to present evidence showing that Kaczynski is the UNABOMber.
He faces a later trial in Newark, New Jersey, on federal charges that he mailed a package bomb that killed advertising executive Thomas Mosser in New Jersey.
Attorneys are hopeful they can impanel 12 impartial jurors and six alternates to decide the fate of Kaczynski, a 55-year-old former college math instructor, who was arrested at a remote Montana cabin last year, United Press International reported.
Denvir and Clarke want prospective jurors to complete detailed questionnaires about their knowledge of the case and their feelings about the death penalty, which the government is seeking against Kaczynski.
The former college math instructor is charged separately in New Jersey in connection with a fifth bombing.
One report by federal defender Quin Denvir said the names and addresses of 18 supposed Unabomber witnesses were publicly distributed in July with the suggestion that they be contacted and scared as a game.
Explosive devices placed or mailed by the notorious UNABOMber killed three people and injured 23 during a 17-year reign of terror that began in 1978.
Debevoise also heard arguments on a defense request to transfer the New Jersey case to Sacramento, where a November trial date has been set.
In his latest ruling Monday, he said the defense argument applies only "when the government compels an individual to incriminate himself," which he says didn't happen in Kaczynski's case, news reports said.
But Burrell disagreed, saying that threats to witnesses in the 18-year Unabomber case "raise the specter that juror safety is potentially at risk."
U.S. District Court Judge Garland Burrell Jr. has ordered that jurors' identities in the Sacramento trial be kept secret, but said they won't be sequestered.
WASHINGTON, December 10 (Xinhua) -- Unabomber suspect Theodore J. Kaczynski pleaded innocent today via video to charges he sent the mail bomb killing an advertising executive exactly two years ago.
David and Wanda turned in Theodore Kaczynski last year after authorities had mounted an unsuccessful 18-year search for the Unabomber.
-- Lawyers are set to make opening statements Monday in trial of Unabomber suspect Theodore Kaczynski.
The family argued that other families in the future might be reluctant to turn in relatives if a death sentence were imposed in this case.
WASHINGTON, September 4 (Xinhua) -- Authorities have moved UNABOMber suspect Theodore Kaczynski from Sacramento County Jail to a federal prison 20 miles southeast of Oakland in California.
He also said reports of harassment against witnesses -- submitted by attorneys on both sides of the case -- meet the test for juror anonymity spelled out by the 9th U.S.
Media reports said Kaczynski's lawyers requested the transfer, which was completed Wednesday, 10 weeks before his trial begins in Sacramento.
Kaczynski's plea from California was made through a live hookup to the federal courthouse in Newark, New jersey, where Judge Dickinson R. Debevoise presided in a courtroom, The Associated Press reported.
The 55-year-old former mathematics instructor's defense team argued that admitting the documents would infringe on his rights of privacy and protection from self-incrimination.
WASHINGTON, August 15 (Xinhua) -- Lawyers for UNABOMber suspect Theodore Kaczynski are asking for special measures to find northern California jurors who aren't biased against him by news coverage.
Burrell said he'll form the panel when he has 12 jurors and six alternates.
-- In their drive to win back the House in 1998, Democrats are counting on Latino distrust of the GOP to unseat Republican incumbents in San Diego and a half-dozen other districts nationwide.
-- Chairmen of the House Budget and Ways and Means committees Sunday said they would oppose an emerging administration initiatives to offer Medicare benefits to younger retirees and predicted the proposal would be rejected by the Congress.
Federal authorities believe he used bombs to kill three people and injure 23 others between 1978 and 1995.
U.S. District Judge Garland Burrell Jr. issued that order today in denying a news media motion to make juror names public, according to news reports.
The attorneys say the 17-year case has prompted more news coverage than any other in history, including 341 New York Times articles between June 1993 and May 1997.
Kaczynski's lawyers are seeking a single trial there on all the Unabomber charges.
Kaczynski, 54, was arrested April 3 at his cabin in Lincoln, Montana, and is being held without bail.
The defense had asked that lists of licensed drivers, as well as lists of registered voters, be used to broaden the pool of ury.
In Sacramento, California, where Kaczynski has been jailed since early summer, the U.S.
FBI agents arrested Theodore Kaczynski 19 months ago at his cabin in rural Montana following one of the most intensive manhunts in U.S. history.
The court has contacted about 600 prospects for the 12-member jury, with six alternates, so far.
The UNABOMber was so named because his early targets were universities and airlines.
Among those present was Susan Mosser, whose 50-year-old husband, Thomas, was killed when he opened a package containing a bomb on December 10, 1994, in his northern New Jersey home.
U.S. District Judge Garland Burrell Jr. plans to call one dozen prospective jurors a day, beginning today, until he has a pool of at least 64.
The terrorist is so dubbed because his first targets included universities and airlines.
Their 1,600-page motion also asks the pool to be taken from licensed drivers rather than voter registration lists typically used in federal trials.
U.S. District Judge Garland Burrell Jr. says Kaczynski's constitutional rights wouldn't be violated if his potentially incriminating journals, notes and other private writing are used against him.
Marshals Service moved Kaczynski to the county public defender's office for the cross-country arraignment.
-- White House officials said President Bill Clinton wanted to put in place a plan to shore up social security, which is expected to run out money by about 2030.
Media Attorney Charity Kenyon argued there isn't enough evidence showing they will be harassed, endangered or influenced if the public and news media knew who they are.
WASHINGTON, January 5 (Xinhua) -- The following are major news items in leading U.S. newspapers today:
If convicted, he could receive the death penalty.
-- Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan broached the sensitive subject of stock prices in a speech, saying that "very rapid asset price declines" can be "a virulently negative force in the economy."
Lt. Dan Lewis, the jail's executive director, said the Federal Correctional Institution near Pleasanton holds a higher number of white collar criminals and may be quieter.
Circuit, which may be asked to overturn his order.
At that point, attorneys will question juror candidates and use dozens of preemptory challenges to exclude those they consider unfit.
-- Contending that he had no further place in Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's right-wing coalition, Foreign Minister David Levy resigned Sunday, leaving the embattled government with a razor-thin majority in parliament.
Burrell rejected a motion on the same issue earlier.
-- Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin Sunday warned Congress against counting on a federal budget surplus, calling talk of tax cuts "very dangerous."
Still, the Fed chief didn't predict a market plunge or even comment on its current level.