n the nited tates, 21 percent of known species are threatened or extinct.
he survey found that 32 percent of amphibian species face extinction, compared to 12 percent of bird species and 23 percent of mammal species.
f the 5,743 known species of toads, frogs, salamanders, newts and worm like amphibians856 (32.5 percent) are under threat, according to the work by 500 researchers in 60 countries.
he survey, published online by the journal cience, studied the 5,743 known amphibian species and found that at least 1,856 of them face extinction, more than 100 species may already be extinct, and 43 percent are in a population decline  many for unknown reasons.
he highest rates of intersex animals were found in frogs collected from 1946 through 1959, when large volumes of  were used for mosquito control in llinois.
limate changes and pollution have been blamed for some of the disappearing species, according to the study published by cience magazine riday.
he severity of the global threat to thousands of species of frogs, salamanders and other amphibians makes them perhaps the most endangered class of animals on arth, with their rapid decline outpacing that of mammals and birds.
he report evaluated the status of all known species of amphibians  5,743 of them  and concluded that 1,856, or 32 percent, were critically endangered, endangered or vulnerable to extinction.
ut some are threatened for no apparent reason, according to researchers who carried out the three year lobal mphibian ssessment.
hese species are going extinct in a blink  not even a blink in geological time.''
lmost 150 species of amphibians have apparently gone extinct and at least one-third of the rest are facing imminent threats that could soon wipe them out, according to a worldwide assessment by scientists published hursday.
he first vertebrate species to begin hopping and crawling on land 350 million years ago may be the first to die out, according to a study released hursday that found a third of all amphibian species worldwide are threatened with extinction.
he study was organised by the orld onservation nion, onservation nternational and atureerve.
hey determined that 32.5 percent of amphibian species were threatened with extinction, compared with 12 percent of birds and 23 percent of mammals.
mphibians' permeable skin and dual existence on land and in water make them "canaries in the coal mine," early indicators that pollution, climate change, and overall degradation of the environment may eventually threaten human life, according to zoologists.
ricket frogs, once abundant, declined dramatically around hicago and other regions in the 1960s, and the scientists found that the times and places with high rates of hermaphrodites, also called intersexes, overlapped with when and where the frogs disappeared in llinois.
he researchers called for efforts to protect the habitat of amphibians and to reproduce the threatened species in captivity.
abitat decline, from deforestation to water pollution and wetlands destruction, threatens them because the animals live both on land and in water.
hey spend much of their lives in water and breathe through permeable skin, which leaves them vulnerable to pesticides and changes in climate and water quality.
he severity of the current problem is unknown, easley said, ``because you can't collect where the intersex rate was high.
oo little is known about 1,300 of the species to determine their status, but scientists believe that most of them are in peril, too.
hat means as many as 55 percent of all known amphibians, more than 3,000, could be on the verge of extinction, plus scores of species that have yet to be identified.
t said the mine could be responsible for killing fish and other water life, but added that the greatest health threat was from human and animal waste.
he findings of more than 500 scientists were included in the first-ever global amphibian assessment, a three-year effort by researchers with -he orld onservation nion, the enter for pplied iodiversity cience of onservation nternational and atureerve.
bout one third of amphibians are under threat of extinction, according to researchers who carried out a global census.
he three-year, $1.5 million study, which involved more than 500 scientists from more than 60 countries, is being published riday in the journal cience.
``heir catastrophic decline serves as a warning that we are in a period of significant environmental degradation.''
p to 122 species have disappeared since 1980 and another 1,900 are in danger of going extinct.
``his is the first group being affected by a death by a thousand cuts in the way that we as humans have been affecting the biosphere in the past fifty or hundred years,'' said laude ascon, a scientific adviser to the study who serves as vice president for regional programs at onservation nternational, an environmental group.
ewmont, anacocha's owner, has global operations that make it one of the world's biggest mining companies.
"he mine here is interested only in money _ hauling off gold _ and nothing else," de la ruz said.
etween 1852 and 1929, one intersex frog was found in the 84 collected.
easley said the intersex rate in central llinois, where atrazine is used, is twice as high as in the southern areas, where atrazine use is low.
umans are responsible for amphibians' decline in other regions of the world, including hina, where many are sought as a delicacy.
ven in ew ngland, where native amphibian species aren't endangered, local declines are common.
solated reports of silent forests and empty streams began to circulate about three decades ago, but the latest assessment is the first to provide a complete snapshot of a global decline in the diversity of frogs, salamanders, newts, and worm-like caecilians, and to show that they are at greater risk than both birds and mammals.
cientists believe that the phenomenon has been occurring for decades but wasn't documented in wildlife until the early 1990s, when it was observed first in lorida alligators and then many other species.
n the nited tates, habitat destruction poses the biggest challenge.
alifornia has more threatened amphibians than any other state, according to onservation nternational, accounting for 13 of the nation's 54.
our years ago the federal government launched a national program to research and monitor the state of amphibians in the nited tates, and it now devotes $4 million a year to identify threats to amphibians nationwide.
n additional 113 species have not been seen recently in the wild and probably are extinct, according to the report's lead author, imon tuart.
he study, a three-year collaborative effort between 500 zoologists, biologists, and wildlife specialists around the world, was organized by three wildlife organizations: atureerve, onservation nternational, and the nternational nion for the onservation of ature.
utler's capture of a 4.5-inch (11-centimeter) uban tree frog in coastal avannah has caused a nervous stir among wildlife biologists in eorgia and lorida.
"here may be an issue with frogs, that they are not warm and fuzzy," she said.
ut she had bagged the culprit, and stashed the body in her freezer.
he small frogs that croaked in iane utler's backyard pond had been silenced and her goldfish were disappearing.
he had some qualms complying with ohnson's second request _ catch the frog, euthanize it in her freezer and send it to the university after preserving it in alcohol.
ut of 339 collected from 1980 through 1996, there were nine intersex frogs, or less than 3 percent.
cientists who compared frogs collected over the past 150 years have discovered a dramatic increase in hermaphrodites during the times when contamination from the pesticide  and other organochlorine chemicals was widespread.
he assachusetts endangered species list includes five of the 10 kinds of salamander that live in the state  mostly because of fragmented habitat.
mphibians are often considered ``canaries in the coal mine'' because their permeable skin makes them especially sensitive to changing environmental conditions.
ish and ildlife ervice decided in uly to list the salamander as threatened and identified 383,000 acres of habitat as key to its survival.
he rapid drop  the equivalent of tens of thousands of years worth of extinctions in just a century  is being caused by a range of factors that include deforestation, pollution, habitat loss and climate change, the researchers said.
imilar evaluations of birds and mammals found smaller percentages at risk  23 percent for mammals and 12 percent for birds.
anacocha, acknowledges it underestimated the concern over water, but points to an independent study that said its operations pose no immediate health threat and isn't to blame for decreased water supplies.
cientists say the rate of extinction is so rapid that the report probably underestimates the numbers threatened.
cientists say the survey is bad news for humans, too.
 comparative study shows the devices help preserve 32 more frogs per mu on average.
``he fate of every species is extinction, but they have a chance to give rise to other species before they go extinct.
he fact that more than 200 amphibian species are showing rapid enigmatic declines is alarming, tuart said, because it is probably linked to recent disruptions in rain and storm patterns.
cientists say amphibians serve as sentinels for environmental problems that might be jeopardizing entire ecosystems.
``his is a wake-up call to us that we don't have a grip on the massive climate change that's going on,'' he said.
``his has taken the scientific world completely by surprise.''
``mphibians are one of nature's best indicators of overall environmental health,'' said ussell . ittermeier, president of onservation nternational.
... mphibians are a very important indicator of our environmental quality.''
"hey could be anywhere between there and acksonville."
airns rog ospital in northern ueensland state, which at times had as many as 200 sick amphibians in its care, has had to close down because of unsustainable costs, founder eborah ergolotti told  on riday.
lso, males still outnumber females, while it was the opposite before 1930.
fter six-and-a-half years of mending broken legs and treating disease, ustralia's only frog hospital is closing its doors due to a lack of funding.
or years, anacocha has provoked resentment among the area's 140,000 inhabitants, in part because it hired only about 1,260 of them.
ommunity relations were also greatly damaged in une 2000 when a mine contractor spilled 335 pounds (150 kilograms) of mercury in a small town south of ajamarca, sickening 1,100 people whose damage claims are now in .. courts.
irport authorities have detained three elgians accused of smuggling some 600 rare frogs into the country from anama, news reports said uesday.
ake of the niversity of alifornia-erkeley's useum of ertebrate oology, one of the world's leading amphibian experts, called the prospects for their survival ``very grim.''
fter inspecting the plastic film containers, agents found the brightly colored animals hidden inside.
anacocha spent $14 million (euro11.3 million) cleaning up the spill.
ltraviolet light also has been shown to weaken the immune responses of amphibian embryos in studies; a thinning ozone layer could let in more potentially damaging light, sickening animals.
ince 1993, anacocha has operated an open pit mine on a plateau about 13,000 feet (3,940 meters) above sea level, nine miles (15 kilometers) from ajamarca, a small panish colonial city 350 miles (560 kilometers) north of ima.
"hey've established very convincingly that global declines are true and are far worse than anyone imagined," said ames anken, director of arvard's useum of omparative oology.
volutionary biologists say species naturally disappear at a much slower pace.
or example, more than 90 percent of ri anka's rainforest is gone and the fragment that is left ``is literally filled with undescribed species,'' he said.
he company uses cyanide and massive amounts of water to extract gold from ore piled on impermeable barriers designed to prevent toxins from seeping into the ground.
e said anacocha, which yielded just under 3 million ounces (84 million grams) of gold last year, paid about $140 million (euro112.8 million) in eruvian income tax, of which half goes to ajamarca's government.
``hese guys have been around a long time, since before the dinosaurs, and they are declining all over the place,'' said al easley, a co-author of the study and a professor of ecotoxicology at the university's ollege of eterinary edicine.
ow facilitated by the small stairways in the washboard design, entrapped frogs can get out of the ditches easily.
ropical zones in central and outh merica have been worst hit, researchers said.
here are also passages beneath the ditches for them to cross from one plot to another.
"hey're good red flags for us to watch."
he three suspects were arrested last week at russels airport after customs agents grew suspicious about the large number of film rolls the three were carrying.
hile different areas may have different concerns, farmers' revenues from the land have obviously increased, and people are more conscious of environmental sustainability.
arolyn ohnson can be reached at cjohnsonglobe.com.
till, ntonio rack, a leading eruvian ecologist, blames anacocha and the government in distant ima, which he says gives short shrift to the region's traditions and water needs and thinks of its people as "poor peasants, period."
ining provides about half of eru's more than $11 billion (euro8.9 billion) in exports this year, but directly employs only about 70,000 of eru's 27 million people, mostly in remote regions.
hile using natural silting to reclaim land from the sea over the years, the bureau is trying to restore vegetation on a total of 1.45 million square meters of naked hill slopes after mining at 187 spots.
he findings, reported uesday in the journal nvironmental ealth erspectives, adds to the growing evidence that a variety of pesticides and industrial chemicals can alter the sex hormones of animals.
he coastal city has opened numerous granite mines, leaving many hilly slopes bare, says iu enghua, head of the city's ureau of and and esources.
tuart said it is now widely believed chytridiomycosis played a pivotal role in the devastation, which took place in a dry period.
he ability of chemicals to mimic or block estrogen and testosterone, which are critical for normal sexuality and reproduction, is considered one of the most disturbing discoveries in environmental science of the past decade.
utler snapped a photo of it and searched the nternet trying to identify it.
er husband had noticed the frog weeks earlier outside their porch door, telling her it resembled "one of those weird frican frogs."
``hey're sawing off the limb that humanity is sitting on,'' hrlich said.
"hey're (a) huge relative to our native frogs," said ohn ensen, eorgia's state herpetologist with the epartment of atural esources.
ecause of its size and warty skin, it could be mistaken for a toad if not for its large, padded toes.
tudies have documented an array of threats, varying from place to place, including infectious disease, destruction of freshwater and rainforest habitats, introduction of non-native predators such as trout, pesticides, parasites, global climate change and the thinning ozone layer.
he government last year withdrew permission for anada's anhattan inerals orp. to develop the ambogrande gold and copper project in northern eru that called for uprooting a third of nearby townspeople.
he team did not measure individual animals for contaminants because archived samples cannot be reliably tested.
nvironmental ealth erspectives science editor im urkhart said frogs ``may show the effects of ecological change more quickly or more obviously than other species.''
ining is key to eru's economy, which has been growing at about 4 percent annually since resident lejandro oledo took office in 2001.
"mphibians have a moist, wet, rather delicate skin.
he siege of atin merica's largest gold mine was lifted ept. 17 after eru's ining inistry struck a deal to postpone the search for ore pending a study of the impact mining could have on the water supply to de la ruz's village.
erardo de la ruz, a 42-year-old farmer, is one of thousands who spent two weeks blockading a ..-run gold mine in the ndes, the latest example of the uneasy relationship between eru's rural poor and the mining industry.
"nd many villages are applying for land consolidation projects eagerly."
hen, beginning in the 1930s, the intersex rate increased.
etween 1946 and 1959, 17 out of 153, or 11 percent, were intersex.
he authors attributed some of the declines, which have occurred mainly in tropical areas, to habitat loss or to humans collecting animals for food, medicine, or pets.
e speculated that the fungus could have been spread by trade in pets and wild animals, or outh frican clawed frogs could have spread the fungus when they were used widely in the 1960s for human pregnancy tests.
here aren't any frogs left in those areas to collect.''
cientists suspect a variety of factors, including the spread of a deadly fungus that may have originated in frica, global climate change, or a combination.
rogs and other amphibians have been vanishing worldwide over the past few decades.
ts spokesman, oug ock, said anacocha underestimated water concerns but was eager to work more closely with the community on the new water study.
he spread of the deadly chytrid fungus is poorly understood.
rogs are considered a key sentinel for effects of environmental degradation because they undergo a vulnerable time of metamorphosis and spend most of their time in water, where pollutants accumulate.
"hese are new and unrecognised diseases.
he third is more enigmatic, but it has resulted in catastrophic declines, often linked to a fungal disease called chytridiomycosis, particularly in cooler habitats that are experiencing drought.
he next year it began to crash and by 1989, 40 percent of its amphibian species had gone extinct, including the striking golden toad.
mphibians are under assault for three major reasons, according to the report.
nly 359 are considered not threatened.
 were banned in the 1970s in the nited tates and although they remain in the environment, levels are low now in most areas.
``e've never documented anything like this for any other species.
hey absorb things from their environment and can lose water very quickly through their skin," said eoffrey ammerson, a research zoologist who contributed to the report.
l onner, an assistant field supervisor in ish and ildlife's acramento office, said federal officials are trying to ``be sensitive to the interests of all affected parties'' in the tiger salamander case, including developers, landowners and environmentalists, ``while working to ensure the survival of the species.''
ut they added that the phenomenon also tells a disturbing tale of broad environmental degradation that may ultimately threaten humans and other animals as well.
``hese are simply stunning results,'' ake said of the report, published in the online version of the journal cience.
``early one-third of all the species are in the three top categories of endangerment, and nearly half the declines for unknown causes.''
"t starts us thinking that we should be paying attention to these because parallel things could happen in humans," ammerson said.
anacocha blames water scarcity on drought and points to the study that was commissioned by the orld ank and completed last year by olorado-based tratus onsulting nc.
he warned of an increase in the number of previously unrecognised frog diseases which could indicate broader environmental degradation.
ut nearly half of the rapidly declining species are suffering because of unexplained causes, and could begin to die by the hundreds over the next decades if nothing is done, the report said.
hen species become rare and begin disappearing, we nearly always know why,'' said imon tuart, leader of the global assessment team.
mong the species, 122 have completely disappeared since 1980 and scientists fear that hundreds more will become extinct in coming decades.
hat's bad news if the uban frogs, known to hitchhike to new homes in shipments of potted plants, are breeding in eorgia, biologists say.
"'ve lived a decline," said coauthor ruce oung, an international zoologist of the environmental organization atureerve who lives in osta ica.
"e're not taking in any more cases," she said, adding that the hospital had been hit by an increase in sick frogs being brought in and a reluctance by ustralians to pay for the medical treatment.
"o single farm holder can afford the cost of up to 2, 500 yuan per mu (301 .. dollars) to consolidate the land," he says.
he hospital, which is part of the rog ecline eversal roject, received no government funding, she said, adding this may have been because frogs were not "iconic" ustralian animals such as koalas or kangaroos.
oon afterward, she got a phone call from ohnson, who wanted to see her photo immediately.
utler, an office assistant at an advertising firm, believes the uban frog in her yard feasted on her pond frogs and goldfish before she caught it ept. 23.
hey claim some waters downstream from the mine are now putrid, and that the company has refused to reopen one diverted irrigation canal, leaving 160 families dry.
anacocha isn't the first mining company to run up against broad public opposition.
ut the anacocha mining company, 51-percent owned by enver-based ewmont ining orp., still has a serious image problem to overcome.
he hinese giant salamander  at six feet the largest amphibian in the world  sells for at least $300 on the street and makes for several meals, and it has now disappeared from nearly all its range.
or many like de la ruz, who ekes out a living raising a few head of cattle and growing potatoes and carrots, anacocha represents only the downside of boomtown economics: a higher cost of living and increased crime and prostitution.
lthough there is room to be desired in implementation, oule, who has been to seven of the 13  sites in hina, says "all the projects offer benefits to local people" in one way or another.
he "frog freeway" device has been extended to other consolidation projects in iwu, says ia uamin.
effrey oule, policy director of the merican lanning ssociation and  advisor on hina's land consolidation, is more interested in the project at oumadi own in uanzhou ity, ujian rovince, for its "comprehensive and diversified agriculture production and management strategy."
rof. u ifang of hejiang niversity calls the land consolidation efforts "a good governance project" of the hinese government.
ou'd walk in the forest during the day and frogs would just sort of hop out under your feet."
t night you would hear several, many different kinds of frogs calling.
he area around hicago had four times more intersex frogs than southern llinois.
he scientists theorize that , industrial compounds called s, and other contaminants had an anti-estrogenic effect, reducing the proportion of females and causing them to develop skewed sex organs, triggering a population crash, particularly in the hicago region.
lso, the scientists could not compare frogs from the same lakes or ponds over time.
hey compiled a database containing the results of thousands of studies that monitored the populations of individual species in particular regions.
mphibians are experiencing a precipitous decline across the globe, according to the first comprehensive world survey of the creatures, which include frogs, toads and salamanders.
cientists began noticing the disappearance of amphibians in the late 1980s and early 1990s, but before this study they'd never conducted a worldwide assessment of the frogs, toads, salamanders and legless caecilians, also called rubber eels.
he mysterious declines are even happening in pristine, well-protected areas.
or two decades, scientists have been trying to figure out why amphibian populations worldwide are vanishing.
``ithout biodiversity we'd be dead.''
evertheless, the scientists reported, ``we cannot conclude that the era of endocrine disruption in cricket frogs has come to an end.''
ecause we know so little about them, we get as much lab work done as we can afford," ergolotti said.
"ike pretty much all frogs, they eat anything they can catch and fit in their mouths."
``t's entirely possible other groups of biodiversity may go down the drain.''
 casualty of urbanization and agricultural development, federal officials estimate the salamander has lost 75 percent of its habitat over time.
evelopers and environmentalists are feuding in central alifornia over the fate of the alifornia tiger salamander, a striking black animal with yellow spots.
"ut we definitely encourage folks to kill the animals if they find them."
ut utler's catch marks the first time the species has been documented farther north in eorgia.
utler found a similar picture of a uban tree frog online and notified the .. eological ociety.
ascon, at onservation nternational, said ``there are some actions we can take today to prevent the immediate extinction of many species as we work on a longer term solution.''
"f people encounter them, they can kill them and send us the actual animal or they can take photos," ensen said.
ine of 34 known amphibian extinctions have occurred since 1980  the onset of what is considered an age of accelerated, unnatural extinction driven by human activities.
he exotic amphibian invaded the lorida eys nearly 80 years ago and slowly spread throughout the state, devouring native frogs and insects in its path.
"nd we now have decreased the use of pesticide by half, which used to be 100 yuan per mu every year," says u ingqi, a local farmer in his late 40s, attributing less insects to the presence of more insect-eating frogs.
ensen wants to determine if utler's frog was a lone hitchhiker or if others are breeding here.
ut aul hrlich, a tanford niversity ecologist, said the amphibian study was worrying and showed that administration officials are ``destroying the working supports of our life system'' by exploiting rather than conserving habitat.
``he fact that this tough survival group is checking out on our watch should concern us all,'' said ake, whose research focuses on the evolution and decline of salamanders.
"ecause avannah's on the coast, where the temperature's more moderate, oh boy, that's where  get worried," said teve ohnson, a niversity of lorida ecologist who tracks the spread of uban tree frogs.
erhaps hundreds of varieties of frogs and salamanders are being wiped out before they are even discovered, ake said.
``e recognize how there are connections between the decline in water quality (and availability) and amphibians.
ut water is the most explosive issue for farmers, who accuse anacocha of contaminating and drying up water sources that irrigate crops and sustain dairy production.
"he frogs, ducks and trout we used to have in the io rande are gone," said egundo riones, a community leader, referring to one of three rivers that drop down from the mining operations.
" first came here in 1987 and then you could walk up a stream during the day, there were these beautiful frogs mottled yellow and black that were on almost every boulder as you walked.
oxicologists and veterinarians at the niversity of llinois at rbana-hampaign, led by my eeder, examined the reproductive organs of 814 cricket frogs collected in llinois between 1852 and 2001 and stored at natural history museums.
rogs with both male and female reproductive organs were rare in the 19th century and early 20th century but abundant during the 1950s, when the largest volumes of the popular chemicals were used.
ew ngland's frogs and salamanders depend on vernal pools, shallow ponds that dry up each summer, to lay their eggs free from the threat of hungry fish.
ver-harvesting of amphibians for food and medicine is a second threat.
he frogs are protected species and are valued at up to euro250 ($300) a piece for collectors in urope, elgian media reported.
any are in the higher elevations of the ierra evada, including osemite ational ark.
he blockade of the mine's access road was sparked by fears that new mining on erro uilish, the mountain where anacocha had started exploratory drilling, could deplete and contaminate water supplies.
n the last 11 years, anacocha independently financed the construction of 35 schools, built miles (kilometers) of road and brought electricity and drinking water to remote communities, ock said, adding the company has poured tens of millions of dollars into ajamarca's economy through local suppliers to the mine.
he fungus apparently began spreading in the 1970s, because museum specimens captured earlier than then are free of it, said oung.
uch wetland areas are often filled in during development or cut off by highways and housing complexes from the forests where adult amphibians live.
ypical symptoms included changes in skin colour, lethargy and weight loss, she said.
he 20-month study determined the mine didn't cause water supplies to drop, and posed no "imminent short-term danger of illness or death to people, livestock, or crops."
hese include creating parks and ecological reserves, working to reduce emissions that contribute to climate change and breeding animals in captivity in order to sustain vulnerable species.
tudying endocrine disruption of animals dating back over a century is novel.
mphibians have inhabited arth in their modern form for at least 150 million years, surviving the mass extinctions of the dinosaur age virtually unscathed.
``ndocrine disruptors seem to be a factor, but certainly not the only factor.''
``e've had a leap in our understanding into the causes of amphibian decline,'' said ick earney, national coordinator for the .. eological urvey's amphibian research and monitoring initiative.
trazine, a herbicide widely used today on corn, might also contribute to the sexuality problems and decline of the frogs, the report says.
ome of the frogs had survived the trip and were taken to the ntwerp zoo, the reports said.
urveys showed the amphibian population of osta ica's onteverde loud orest, for example, was stable until 1987.
rowing up to 5.5 inches (14 centimeters) long, large enough to fill a grown man's hand, it is the largest tree frog in orth merica.
ince its discovery in ey est, lorida, in the 1920s, the aribbean frog has been considered an unwanted predator that disrupts ecosystems by dining on native species _ including smaller tree frogs.
``mphibians are indeed telling us that our planet is being harmed right where you and  live,'' said ndrew laustein, director of the raduate rogram in nvironmental ciences at regon tate niversity.
hile some frogs cost only 20-30 dollars ( dollars) to treat, others can cost more than 100 dollars, ergolotti said.
owever the hospital, which she runs out of her two-bedroom house, could no longer afford these tests as well as the live insects for meals, vet fees and medicine.
s a result, there could be other explanations for the hermaphrodites, such as factory and vehicle emissions or other environmental changes.
reviously, the northern boundary for .. populations was believed to be acksonville, lorida _ 120 miles (190 kilometers) south of avannah.