oral reefs, mangroves, fish and other marine life had been damaged by the tsunamis which rose out of the ndian cean on unday, triggered by a massive earthquake near the ndonesian island of umatra.
amage from the ndian cean tsunami could have been significantly reduced if more coastal areas had maintained their protective shields of mangrove swamps and coral reefs, conservation groups said hursday.
he agency reported one case in hailand where the mangroves also damaged shallow coral reefs.
he nited ations hursday set aside $1 million to assess environmental damage caused by this week's devastating tsunami, as reports of destroyed coral reefs and uprooted mangrove forests began trickling in.
he nited ations hursday set aside $1 million to assess environmental damage caused by this week's devastating tsunami, as reports of destroyed coral reefs and uprooted mangrove forests began trickling in.
n ri anka and hailand, coral damage is reported to be severe, and trees have crashed down onto reefs, ripping many of the corals, some hundreds of years old, apart.
n ri anka and hailand, coral damage is reported to be severe, and trees have crashed down onto reefs, ripping many of the corals, some hundreds of years old, apart.
hey are vital for coastal protection from the sea, the ..
"his is likely to lead to further pressure on the coastal forests, including mangroves," he said in a statement earlier this week.
ome scientists this week said human activity in the coastal zone contributed to the immense damage on shore  such as building tourist hotels too close to the water and tearing out mangrove forests to put in shrimp aquaculture farms throughout sia.
ome scientists this week said human activity in the coastal zone contributed to the immense damage on shore  such as building tourist hotels too close to the water and tearing out mangrove forests to put in shrimp aquaculture farms throughout sia.
 .. agriculture agency called ednesday for the rehabilitation of mangroves damaged by the sian tsunami, saying the move would help speed up recovery in areas affected by the devastating tidal waves.
"he mangroves are the best buffer against tidal waves.
"t wouldn't have been able to stop it completely, of course, but we've seen areas already ... where there were mangroves, there was substantially less damage."
oral could also have been damaged by exposure to the air as water was sucked back from the shore before the tsunamis hit.
"t is so hard to say in brief, but the level of devastation of coastal areas by the disaster is obvious," director of onservation nternational in the ndonesian resort island of ali, etut arjana utra, said.
cientists hursday said they expect marine life from shore to about a mile out to have suffered the worst damage.
cientists hursday said they expect marine life from shore to about a mile out to have suffered the worst damage.
he damage inflicted to mangroves by the ec. 26 tsunami was still being assessed, and changes in soil salinity or fresh water inflow might cause further damage in the longer-term, the agency said in a statement.
angroves are critical nurseries for many of these fish.
angroves are critical nurseries for many of these fish.
"angroves are recognized as being one of the coastal systems that provides buffering against storms and storm effects from the sea," said ick avidson, deputy chief of the secretariat for the amsar onvention on etlands, which also is based in land, near eneva.
angroves can provide a shield against destructive waves, and the ome-based agency said there have been specific cases during the recent tsunami where damage and loss of lives were reduced thanks to the mangroves.
angroves grow in thickets along tropical coastlines and their complicated root systems help to bind the shore together, effectively providing a shield against destructive waves.
amelander said many coral reefs in the ndian cean were just beginning to recover from damage caused by the changing water temperatures generated by the l ino weather pattern.
oth areas were hard hit by the tsunami.
oth areas were hard hit by the tsunami.
he ocean's seagrass bed and mangrove ecosystem would also be affected, utra said, but it is the reefs that bore the brunt of the destruction.
eanwhile, the nited ations' ood and gricultural rganization said it fears the reconstruction of tsunami-hit areas could put pressure on mangroves and other coastal vegetations.
"t will take a long time to recover."
t will take hundreds of years to grow back," he said.
hey cover an area of around 15 million hectares (37,000 acres) worldwide, said the .. agency, with about 40 percent of it found in the countries affected by the tsunami.
amelander says in some cases mangroves, which protect the shore from erosion and often serve as nurseries for young fish, would also have been completel0 years," he said.
" can definitely say there is damage in the area."
" can definitely say there is damage in the area."
n huket sland, one popular beach was piled with dead staghorn coral, starfish, gulper eels, sea cucumbers, and sea grasses.
n huket sland, one popular beach was piled with dead staghorn coral, starfish, gulper eels, sea cucumbers, and sea grasses.
roups of rare aboriginal tribes already near the edge of extinction in the ndaman and icobar islands survived a massive tsunami, the coast guard said hursday.
ts roots collect sediments and slow the water's flow, helping to protect the coastline and preventing erosion.
owever, the ood and griculture rganization said that massive mangrove planting should be avoided, especially in areas where there are other important ecosystems, such as turtle nesting grounds and sea grass beds.
n other parts of the coast, coral reefs and other kinds of vegetation can also help reduce the impact of waves and prevent soil erosion, elvam said.
"here is a huge natural cost, but what it is is still to be determined," said ynne ale, director of the global marine initiative for the ature onservancy, who worked in hailand's huket sland and ri anka for many years.
"here is a huge natural cost, but what it is is still to be determined," said ynne ale, director of the global marine initiative for the ature onservancy, who worked in hailand's huket sland and ri anka for many years.
his week, dive operators and researchers began sending e-mails to the orldish enter in alaysia, an international fisheries research center, painting an early bleak picture of the region's treasured coastal waters.
his week, dive operators and researchers began sending e-mails to the orldish enter in alaysia, an international fisheries research center, painting an early bleak picture of the region's treasured coastal waters.
hile attention is clearly focused on the rising human toll of the tragedy, some dive operators and marine biologists are reporting that from ri anka to hailand corals are suffocating under layers of mud, heaps of rotten fish, are clogging beachfronts, and rare turtle nesting sites have been washed out to sea.
hile attention is clearly focused on the rising human toll of the tragedy, some dive operators and marine biologists are reporting that from ri anka to hailand corals are suffocating under layers of mud, heaps of rotten fish, are clogging beachfronts, and rare turtle nesting sites have been washed out to sea.
nd the beaches of ri anka, the ndaman and icobar islands, and other countries hit by the tsunami host prime nesting spots for some of the world's rarest sea turtles, such as leatherbacks that return to the same spot year after year to lay eggs.
nd the beaches of ri anka, the ndaman and icobar islands, and other countries hit by the tsunami host prime nesting spots for some of the world's rarest sea turtles, such as leatherbacks that return to the same spot year after year to lay eggs.
ommercial activity was completely banned in some areas like the ndaman and icobar islands and fragile patches like the mangroves.
 major problem would be a loss of fish, displaced by the waves from their habitat, and other forms of protein which depend on the reefs.
lready stressed from fishing and tourism, many of the reefs may be covered in mud, which can block sunlight that fish and other organisms below them need.
lready stressed from fishing and tourism, many of the reefs may be covered in mud, which can block sunlight that fish and other organisms below them need.
"ere, there has been very little impact," said . amamurthy, the officer in charge of the forests, about 220 kilometers (135 miles) south of adras, the capital of amil adu state.
early 11,000 people died in ndia, mostly in amil adu state, where tens of thousands of fishermen are still living in relief camps.
lsewhere in amil adu state, the worst-hit in ndia, the sea entered as deep as 1,500 meters (5,000 feet), washing away thousands of people and their homes.
fter the tsunami, authorities in amil adu state launched a massive forestation program along the coast.
he disaster has left more than 120,000 people dead and up to five million displaced in the region, with ndonesia, hailand, ndia and ri anka the worst affected countries.
lso, many fishermen are scared to go to sea.
he ndonesian olcanic and eological isaster itigation irectorate () said on riday 28 areas in the country are prone to tsunami tidal waves and called on local administrations and people to stay alert for such natural disasters.
o avoid tsunami, people should neither reside in the areas close to coastlines nor destroy mangrove forests that protect tidal waves, he said from the agency's compound in andung, est ava.
ut, he said, it remains unclear whether mangroves and coral reefs had a significant protective effect against a "tsunami on the scale that we've just witnessed."
 he ndonesian government unday sent a research vessel to the west coast of tsunami-devastated ceh to conduct survey of the ocean floor around the zone of the earthquake on ec. 26 last year.
"n the region as a whole  think we can expect very severe ecosystem effects," he said, adding the recovery process for coral reefs could take "decades to centuries".
"he coral reef system might be totally destroyed.
ow based in hode sland, ale said the tsunami may have caused lasting environmental damage that may take decades or longer to recover from.
ow based in hode sland, ale said the tsunami may have caused lasting environmental damage that may take decades or longer to recover from.
"lso, it will help diversify the livelihood of the fisherman."
egional marine programme co-ordinator for outh and outheast sia with the  (orld onservation nion) in olombo, ri anka, erker amelander, said damage to the marine ecosystem could be "very, very serious."
  task force based in eneva will assess two things: environmental damage that threatens human health, and the toll on the ecological resources  many of which support tourism and the fishing industry.
  task force based in eneva will assess two things: environmental damage that threatens human health, and the toll on the ecological resources  many of which support tourism and the fishing industry.
he tsunami struck as ndia was reviewing coastal regulations, which critics say were diluted to allow increasing commercial activities near the sea.
owever, some biologists speculated that marine mammals such as whales and dolphins swimming near shore when the tsunami struck may have sensed the strange seas and headed for deeper waters, where the giant waves were barely noticeable.
owever, some biologists speculated that marine mammals such as whales and dolphins swimming near shore when the tsunami struck may have sensed the strange seas and headed for deeper waters, where the giant waves were barely noticeable.
ripps cited the example of the arriott hotel in huket, hailand, which was built next to a turtle nesting beach and so was developed with strict environmental guidelines.
n the aldives, dive operator orbert chmidt said the eastern part of the island was hit the worst, with dead coral and sand covering the runway at ulule nternational irport.
n the aldives, dive operator orbert chmidt said the eastern part of the island was hit the worst, with dead coral and sand covering the runway at ulule nternational irport.
yle ail, director of the izard sland esearch tation on ustralia's reat arrier eef, said damage to coral reefs from a tsunami would likely be similar to that from a cyclone.
owever, the agency said, narrow strips of mangroves, when uprooted or snapped off at mid-trunk and swept inland, can kill people and cause additional damage.
and animals may have had the same "sixth sense" to move to safety: ildlife officials in ri anka's ala ational ark said they have not seen evidence that many animals died, despite the preserve's closeness to the ocean.
"aybe in ast frica where the waves weren't as high, but 'm not sure when you get a 40-foot wave a mangrove would have made a huge difference," said usi oser, research scientist for the ational enter for tmospheric esearch.
"aybe in ast frica where the waves weren't as high, but 'm not sure when you get a 40-foot wave a mangrove would have made a huge difference," said usi oser, research scientist for the ational enter for tmospheric esearch.
hen a tsunami passes, reef structures grind into each other causing extensive damage.
eth aley can be reached at bdaleyglobe.com
hey distributed over the northern province of uang inh and am inh, ai hong city and southern oc rang, a au, ien iang and en re province in the country.
ne other tribe numbering 30,000, the icobarese, are not decreasing and have been partly assimilated into ndian society.
he ndian government in the mid-1970s sent retired military personnel as settlers to the breathtaking tropical territory amid friction with neighbouring ndonesia over ownership.
he entinelese on orth entinel island have constantly repulsed outsiders with showers of arrows and remain one of the least studied of the tribes.
he ndamanese, on the verge of extinction, were decimated by disease from colonisers in the mid-19th century and remain settled on tiny trait sland.
he once reclusive and hostile awara occupy 639 square kilometers on the south and middle ndaman islands.
eth aley can be reached at bdaleyglobe.com
he origins of the endangered ndaman tribes, today only about 12 percent of the overall population of some 350,000, still mystify anthropologists.
enetic evidence suggests the pygmy-like people with dark skin and tightly curled hair have lived on the ndamans for at least 60,000 years.
or generations, the rula tribe in southern ndia made a living out of skinning snakes.
"hose who destroyed the forest and built houses on open beaches had to face the brunt," he said, pointing to a fishing hamlet on a sand bar between the mangroves and the sea that was completely washed away.
he story of ichavaram and others like it in areas where trees protected thatched roofs even as huge concrete structures on open beaches collapsed, prompted environmentalists to call for stringent rules to protect coastal ecology.
hey can't immediately return to fishing because their boats were destroyed and few fish are found close to the shore.
ome 3,000 fishing families in the region depend on mangroves, harvesting some 230 tons in prawns, fishes and crabs annually.
ome trees in rows close to the sea were uprooted, said amamurthy as he and an ssociated ress team toured the area on a boat.
angroves grow in brackish water, in some delta areas where rivers meet the sea.
ndonesia's tate inister for esearch and echnology usmayanto adiman saw off the ship, aruna aya , at akarta's anjung riok ort.
horebirds, crab-eating monkeys, and fishing cats all make it home.
angrove forests thrive near the mouths of large rivers where river deltas provide lots of sediment.
any regulations were eased in the past decade to promote aquaculture, exports and tourism as part of the government's economic liberalization policies.
he nge tribe was confined to 25 square kilometers after the orest epartment took over their land in 1977 and face further loss of territory as the government builds homes, roads, jetties and a match factory near their reserve.
p to half of the world's mangrove swamps have disappeared in the last 20-30 years because of the development of tourist resorts, transport infrastructure and commercial prawn fishing, ripps said in a telephone interview.
"hese act as shock absorbers for the types of flooding and the tsunami that we saw," said imon ripps, head of the orldwide und for ature's marine program based in land, witzerland.
"he advantage of mangroves is severalfold," ripps said.
"he great ndamanese tribes are all ," t.
ive tribes numbering 989 people were safe after unday's onslaught, including the 100-member nge, 250 of the fiercely independent entinelese, 39 of the almost extinct ndamanese, 350 of the arawa and 250 of the hunter-gatherer hompen.
and animals may have had the same "sixth sense" to move to safety: ildlife officials in ri anka's ala ational ark said they have not seen evidence that many animals died, despite the preserve's closeness to the ocean.
"hey are very important  a link to our roots we come from, to our prehistoric days when we were at the hunting and gathering stage," joy agchi, executive director of the ew elhi-based nthropological urvey of ndia said.
ut they have been steadily destroyed," said . elvam, program director at the adras-based ..
any lives could have been saved if mangroves and reefs had been conserved in a healthy state, said the angrove ction rogram, an environmental organization based in ort ngeles, ashington.
he angrove ction rogram estimates that there are 16,000 hectares (40,000 acres) of mangroves left in the world.
he program aims to involve fishermen's families in growing and preserving forests.
"y spending millions of dollars on a tsunami warning system, we may save the people, but not their livelihood.
"e are not aiming only at tsunamis but other natural disasters like volcanic eruptions as well.
he reduction was blamed for the conversion of these forests to aquaculture and farming, which has seriously ruined the mangrove forests' ecosystem and impacted the sea environment.
hen the tsunami struck on ec. 26, the mangroves in the ichavaram wetland acted as a buffer, saving the rulas and about a dozen fishing hamlets from the killer waves.
here was no loss of human life or property in these villages, located 100 meters (110 yards) to 700 meters (765 yards) from the sea.
 10-meter high tsunami triggered by a powerful earthquake off northern umatra island swept through coastlines across the ndian cean on ec. 26.
"here is good evidence from previous events such as hurricanes and typhoons that the presence of mangroves certainly assists in reducing the impact on land," avidson said.
n unday, the island chain bore the full brunt of the massive waves triggered by a huge undersea earthquake off nearby umatra, ndonesia.
he ndian cean region, with its aqua, shallow seas, hosts some of the most beloved and famous coral reefs in the world that support scores of fish species found nowhere else.
he ndian cean region, with its aqua, shallow seas, hosts some of the most beloved and famous coral reefs in the world that support scores of fish species found nowhere else.
"his is a massive, massive erosion event," she said.
"his is a massive, massive erosion event," she said.
nd in 1964, when a tsunami hit laska, news reports noted that baby salmon were killed, although it's unclear how many.
nd in 1964, when a tsunami hit laska, news reports noted that baby salmon were killed, although it's unclear how many.
cientists don't have comprehensive historical data about marine damage that tsunamis can cause, especially one of this magnitude.
cientists don't have comprehensive historical data about marine damage that tsunamis can cause, especially one of this magnitude.
ut others say that while the lack of mangrove forests probably exacerbated the destruction, it's unlikely that they would have slowed the tsunami's enormous volume of water.
ut others say that while the lack of mangrove forests probably exacerbated the destruction, it's unlikely that they would have slowed the tsunami's enormous volume of water.
he waves slowed after entering the thick forests and the volume of water was also reduced because it split off into dozens of canals and creeks, he said.
hen a 1972 wildlife law banned such sales and the tribals, who lived in seaside forests, turned to fishing and worked on a government program to restore coastal mangrove swamps damaged by human development.
"any fish washed ashore, trees that were knocked down (smashed) into the reefs," ichiru ain, a researcher who was conducting a reef survey at u o urin, a popular dive spot in hailand, when the tsunami struck, said in an e-mail.
"any fish washed ashore, trees that were knocked down (smashed) into the reefs," ichiru ain, a researcher who was conducting a reef survey at u o urin, a popular dive spot in hailand, when the tsunami struck, said in an e-mail.
eanwhile, corals, which only grow a fraction of an inch each year, may be excreting mucus as a defensive mechanism against the mud  "expensive in terms of energy (that) weakens the coral," e-mailed arco oordeloos of the orldish enter.
eanwhile, corals, which only grow a fraction of an inch each year, may be excreting mucus as a defensive mechanism against the mud  "expensive in terms of energy (that) weakens the coral," e-mailed arco oordeloos of the orldish enter.
he health of the reefs could in turn dramatically affect the size of fish populations which rely on them for their habitat.
rior to 1991, ndia allowed few industrial and commercial activities, including tourism-related projects, along the coast.
o boost exports, officials often overlooked environmental concerns and allowed industrial projects detrimental to the coast's ecology.
hey do know that in 1883, when the rakatoa volcano exploded and sent a giant tsunami washing over ndonesia, coral heads that weighed hundreds of tons were tossed hundreds of feet inland.
hey do know that in 1883, when the rakatoa volcano exploded and sent a giant tsunami washing over ndonesia, coral heads that weighed hundreds of tons were tossed hundreds of feet inland.
"hat we do know is that the demand for fuelwood, for wood to rebuild houses and infrastructure and for constructing fishing boats is substantial," said im arle, an  expert on plantations.
"hat we need to do very quickly is to defuse the ticking time-bombs that have been generated in the past decade on our coast," said almik hapar, a ew elhi-based nature activist.
he hompen live along riverbanks in the dense mangroves surrounding the settlement of ampbell ay, 800 kilometres (500 miles) south of the ndamanese capital ort lair.
ut in ichavaram _ covered with 2,220 acres (900 hectares) of mangrove forests _ the local residents continue to fish just as they did before the tsunami.
he death toll in the catastrophe in ndonesia's ceh and orth umatra provinces alone reached more than 80,000 on hursday.
fficials have asked fishing families to plant a sapling and dedicate it to a family member who died in the disaster.
"e were saved by the trees we planted in the past," said . umar, an rula who spends two hours every morning planting mangrove saplings.
ost of the 28 areas provinces on umatra, ulawesi, ava and apua islands.
ccording to the minister, early information and data on the condition of the seabed around the epicenter of the quake would be extremely useful for establishing an early warning system against earthquake, tsunami and volcanic eruption.
angroves provide a safe haven and a nursery for a variety of fish, birds, crustaceans, and shellfish and have special aerial roots and salt-filtering taproots that enable them to thrive in brackish water.
"nstead these vital protective buffers that nature provides against wind and wave had been foolishly degraded or removed for unsustainable developments," the organization said in a statement.
"e will conduct a submarine survey of the ocean floor around the quake's epicenter to find out whether the fault is still active and the extent of the damage," said usmayanto.
"pparently the damage, the actual physical damage, and the human loss of life was very much less than in other areas and other hotels in the region," he said.
n official of the 144-nation amsar treaty protecting the world's wetlands said initial assessments indicated mangroves had lessened some of the impact of the tsunami, but that further study was needed to determine how effective they were.
oordeloos said fish populations have probably been damaged, too, although it's far too early to get a complete picture.
oordeloos said fish populations have probably been damaged, too, although it's far too early to get a complete picture.
"he presence of coral reefs,  think, slows down the movement of water and the more shallow zone areas you have far away from the coast, the more effective at reducing energy of incoming water systems."
he ndonesian government is also sending a technology service operation team to ceh to provide humanitarian aid and technical assistance, and in the meantime conduct surveys on seabed and damage of the coastal area along the west coast of ceh, said ndonesian officials.
angroves grow in thickets along tropical coastlines and have tangled roots that grow above ground.
oral reefs have been similarly hit by waste water from new developments, dynamite fishing and warmer water because of climate change.
"ou have a region where the marine ecosystem is stressed and degraded as it is," he told .
 proliferation of shrimp farms destroyed vegetation and caused severe waterlogging in many areas.
eaches around outh sia devastated by tsunamis could be restored to their former glory within a few years, but the marine life through which the huge waves passed could take centuries to recover, experts said.
he hotel was built back from the beach and development of the waterfront was severely restricted, so mangrove swamps were preserved along the coast.
"angroves contribute directly to rural livelihoods by providing wood and non-wood forest products _ including timber, poles, fuel wood and thatch for houses," said ette oyche ilkie, an agency expert, "and indirectly by providing spawning grounds and nutrients for fish and shellfish."
"he tsunami has taught us a lesson," said ohan 'souza, an environmental historian at the ew elhi-based awaharlal ehru niversity.
ut in recent years they have been steadily engaging with tourists since a road split their land.
he mangrove islet of ampbell ay is one of hundreds in the archipelago, some partly or fully reserved for aborigines.
he plant will have a small tag with the engraved name of the dead person, said kash eep aruah, chief forest officer of agappattinam district, where nearly 7,000 people died.
he plan to set up a disaster prevention and management center has already been launched and being discussed further," he said.
ccording to the survey report, the country's mangrove forests have to date dwindled to 155,290 hectares, a 50 percent drop from 1980.
ome parts of the western ceh are still not accessible by land because of earthquake and tsunami and have received only a small amount of relief supplies, said the officials.
he estimate of the tsunami-prone areas was based on similar disasters affecting the areas previously, the office's chief, ousana iagian, was quoted by the official ntara news agency as saying.
ietnam has in the past two years worked to ensure sustainable development for submerged forests, which face over-exploitation for aquaculture rearing.
or centuries they have shied away from outside contact, notably with ndians.
his makes coastal areas more susceptible to flooding, as has previously been seen in angladesh, which no longer has a protective shield of mangroves.
waminathan esearch oundation, which helped the government persuade the rulas to manage the ichavaram forest.
"here are no casualties among them."
overnment permission was required to set up any venture within 500 meters (550 yards) from the point up to which high tides reach.
"hey hold the structure of the land together, the coastline together."
he technology service operation team will also carry out mapping and water exploration, provide water and sanitation management, look for solar energy generated electricity, and conduct studies of the affected areas which could be rebuilt and those where dwelling would practically no longer be possible and should be developed into mangrove forests, said the officials.
he ndian navy had been hunting for the aborigines on the tsunami-savaged icobar islands amid fears that any harm to some of nature's most enigmatic communities could push them into extinction.
hey were located by helicopter and some were reached by boat and provided with supplies and medical treatment, oast uard director general run umar ingh said hursday.
ver time, the roots can collect enough debris and mud to extend the edge of the coastline further out.
n serious cases recovery would be slow as there would be fewer larval animals to repopulate the coral.
n offshore coral reef also seems to have prevented much more widespread destruction on the low-lying aldives islands, ripps noted.
t the same time, mangrove forests are teeming with life.
"his way, they will be motivated to grow vegetation and stop encroaching on land along the coast," aruah said.
uch local efforts, however, could slow unless the federal government tightens environmental laws in the coastal region.
 major problem would be the amount of silt, sand and organic matter churned into the water which would then "smother" vegetation and marine life.