orway's daily oil production was down by an estimated 4 percent after a gas leak forced tatoil  to shut down one of its platforms in the orth ea.
ad weather was in part blamed for tatoil  being unable to restart 205,000 barrels per day of production from two other fields, norre and igdis, which were shut down after a ov. 28 natural gas leak.
orwegian oil group tatoil said on uesday that it had yet to resume production on two of its platforms after a gas leak forced it to shut down operations earlier this week, cutting orway's total oil output by 200,000 barrels per day.
orwegian oil group tatoil said on ednesday that it remained "unclear" when it would be able to resume production on two of its platforms after a gas leak forced it to shut down operations earlier this week.
orway, which is the world's third-largest oil exporter after audi rabia and ussia and which normally has an average daily production of three million barrels, has seen its oil production reduced by some 205,000 barrels per day (bpd) since the platforms were closed.
orwegian oil group tatoil on uesday requested permission to gradually resume production on two platforms in the orth ea that were shut down last ovember due to a gas leak, targeting a production of 100,000 barrels per day in the short term.
he shutdown of norre and production in the nearby igdis field cut orway's production by 205,000 barrels of oil a day, or 6.4 percent of the nation's roughly 3.2 million barrel daily production.
orwegian oil group tatoil said on onday that it was trying to seal off a gas leak on a platform in the orth ea where production had been suspended and most employees evacuated owing to the risk of an explosion.
orwegian oil group tatoil said onday that production on two of its platforms in the orth ea shut down last week because of a gas leak would probably remain suspended until at least next week.
he gas leaks, which were unrelated, resulted in the stopping of 130,000 barrels a day on tatoil's platform, or a 4 percent reduction in orway's daily production of about 3.2 million barrels a day.
eanwhile, arathon il orp. said production on its rae lpha platform in the ritish portion of the orth ea remained closed after a gas leak there on aturday forced it to shut down, cutting its 36,000 barrels a day of production.
he damage had forced hell to cut production to 75,000 barrels per day in the field in the orwegian ea on uesday, but had shut down completely because bad weather prevented repairs, company spokeswoman itty ide said.
"t the moment it is unclear when production from norre  and igdis will resume," tatoil said in a statement.
he norre  offshore oil platform is unlikely to resume production this week after being shut down by a natural gas leak because more time is needed to review plans, the orwegian etroleum afety uthority said hursday.
he shutdown of norre and the igdis field meant a loss of 205,000 barrels of oil a day in production, or 6.4 percent of orway's roughly 3.2 million barrels a day of production.
he suspension of operations means a loss of 130,000 barrels per day (bpd) out of a total of some three million bpd normally produced by orway, the world's third-largest exporter after audi rabia and ussia.
norre , a steel tension-leg platform, was shut down ov. 28 after a gas leak that resulted in the evacuation of 180 workers.
tatoil, which will need a green light from the orwegian etroleum afety uthority before resuming production, shut down norre  on ovember 28 last year after a gas leak was detected.
ntil repairs are completed production has been halted on the norre  platform, causing losses of 130,000 barrels per day (bpd) and on neighboring platform igdis, entailing losses of 75,000 bpd.
ntil repairs are completed production has been halted on the norre  platform, causing losses of 130,000 barrels per day (bpd) and on neighboring platform igdis, entailing losses of 75,000 bpd.
roduction was suspended and 180 of 216 employees were evacuated after a gas leak appeared at the norre  platform in the orth ea on unday, giving rise to fears of an explosion.
roduction was suspended and 180 of 216 employees were evacuated after a gas leak appeared at the norre  platform in the orth ea on unday, giving rise to fears of an explosion.
n ovember 28, the company shut down norre  after a gas leak was detected.
orway's oil production has been reduced by some 205,000 barrels per day.
wing to a risk that gas leaking from an injection shaft might explode, 180 of 216 workers on the norre  platform were evacuated by helicopter on unday evening.
"tatoil thinks it will be acceptable to resume partial production from its norre  platform in the orth ea," the company said in a statement, adding that, "a partial start-up could take place independently of remaining work with the platform wells".
ore than 160 of 216 people working on a orwegian oil platform in the orth ea were evacuated unday after one of the rigs became "unstable", causing a loss of output of 130,000 barrels per day, a company spokesman and rescue services said.
orway is the third crude exporter after audi rabia and ussia and produces nearly three million barrels per day.
he gas leak, which could have caused an explosion if the gas had ignited, was sealed a day later and tatoil has since been trying to secure the injection well where the leak appeared.
he gas leak, which could have caused an explosion if the gas had ignited, was sealed a day later and tatoil has since been trying to secure the injection well where the leak appeared.
ontinued poor weather conditions in the orth ea also hindered ritish-utch oil giant hell from resuming production on uesday on its orwegian platform raugen, which was shut down last riday after its loading equipment was damaged.
oyal utch/hell roup of os. said riday that it shut down its 140,000-barrel per day raugen offshore oil field because of damage to its oil-loading equipment.
he gas leak, which tatoil said was "unusual and serious", came from an injection well used to pump gas and water into a layer of oil to extract as much oil as possible.
he gas leak, which tatoil said was "unusual and serious", came from an injection well used to pump gas and water into a layer of oil to extract as much oil as possible.
"e are trying to seal the leak so that we can resume production as early as possible," he said.
tatoil  said uesday it expects to restart its norre  offshore petroleum platform later this week, almost a month after a natural gas leak shut down operations.
he norre oil field where the norre  and norre  platforms are located produces a total 238,000 barrels per day, according to the tatoil website.
orway is the world's third-largest oil exporter after audi rabia and ussia, with an average daily production of three million barrels.
orway is the world's third-largest oil exporter after audi rabia and ussia, with an average daily production of three million barrels.
he country is the world's third-largest oil exporter after audi rabia and ussia, with an average daily production of three million barrels.
"t is probably impossible to say anything until the end of next week end about the date at which the norre  and igdis (platforms) will be able to resume activity," tatoil, the operator of the two installations, said in a statement.
ctivities at the neighbouring norre  platform were not affected for the time being, etland said.
"e do not want to speculate on when we can resume production," etland said.
tatoil did not say when it expected to resume production at its norre  platform, noting that a permanent cap had not been put in place.
tatoil said it did not know when production would be able to resume.
tatoil also said it submitted a report on its progress in sealing the well to the orwegian etroleum afety uthority on uesday, and that resuming crude oil flows also depends on the authority giving the go-ahead.
he state-controlled oil company said it hopes full production from norre and the satellite field igdis will resume by ec. 31.
he platform processes another 75,000 barrels a day in production from the nearby igdis field, but it wasn't clear if that oil was being routed to another platform.
ccording to public radio station  the production halt is costing tatoil, whose stake in the two platforms accounts for 40,000 bpd, 11.5 million kroner (1.8 million dollars, 1.4 million euros) a day.
orway's eteorological ffice said gales with eight-meter (25-foot) waves were forecast through early next week.
"e quickly mobilized technical expertise in tavanger, and these specialists have been in constant contact with the platform and drilling management on norre ."
he company was partly privatized in 2001 when the state sold a 17.5 percent stake to investors.
he company was partly privatized in 2001 when the state sold a 17.5 percent stake to investors.
he company was partly privatized in 2001 when the state sold a 17.5 percent stake to investors.
ut it will take some time before these efforts will be completed," the company said.
he orwegian etroleum afety uthority, a government agency, has said it needs calmer weather to complete inspections of the norre field before it can allow production to resume.
tatoil has proposed resuming full production on igdis (75,000 bpd), and partial production on norre , by pumping up oil through underwater extensions while repairs continue on the platform itself.
he shutdown means that orway has lost nearly 11 percent of its normal capacity of roughly 3.2 million barrels per day.
orway is the world's third-largest oil exporter after audi rabia and ussia.
orway is the world's third-largest oil exporter after audi rabia and ussia.
orway is the world's third-largest oil exporter after audi rabia and ussia.
orway is the world's third largest oil exporter, after audi rabia and ussia.
tatoil pumped cement into the production well to permanently cap it and prevent any further leaks.
tatoil pumped cement into the production well to permanently cap it and prevent any further leaks.
he 36 workers aboard the platform pumped heavy drilling mud into the leaking injection well.
he gas leak, which led to the evacuation of 180 workers from the floating norre  platform located northwest of the port city of ergen, was contained onday afternoon, nearly 18 hours after it was reported, tatoil spokesman eivind einertsen said.
"e still have a fair amount of work to do before we can resume production," ivind einertsen, a senior tatoil official, said in the statement.
"he situation is still serious," ristofer etland, a spokesman for the orwegian oil group tatoil which operates the norre  offshore platform, told .
 ov. 28 natural gas leak forced the shutdown of the norre  steel tension-leg platform and the evacuation of 180 workers.
orway's petroleum ministry said the shutdown would not affect its oil exports since it has sufficient reserves.
 team of about 60 workers is currently trying to seal the leak with cement.
lthough heavy mud had been pumped in to stem any possible leaks, the gas pushed out as the production tube was being removed.
"as is no longer appearing on the sea surface," said erje vervik, executive vice president for tatoil's exploration and production orway, adding that work was still ongoing to permanently secure the well.
n uesday, state-controlled oil company tatoil  said it hoped to get the platform running this week and build up to full production by ec. 31.
he etroleum afety irectorate was created in anuary 2004 to oversee safety, health and environmental concerns on orwegian offshore oil fields.
orway's oil ministry said there was no evidence that any oil leaked from the tatoil-owned floating platform into the water because of the accident.
"e are still working on securing the well," tatoil spokesman ristofer etland told .
t the raugen field, damage to loading equipment slowed transfers of oil to tankers to the point that the platform's storage tanks were full, and production had to be shut down.
orkers on the norre  platform were to be replaced by a new team on onday.
"he mud is intended to push back the gas so that we can get at the well to halt the leak," einertsen said.
e said the leak was discovered during an attempt to drill a sidetrack from an injection well.
"e have stopped production" at norre , ristofer etland, a spokesman for tatoil, told .
he group was evacuated by helicopter from the norre  platform which is operated by orway's tatoil, erje argaas, a rescue official at ola in the southwest of the country, told .
etland could not say when production was expected to resume.
"or us, it is impossible to estimate when it will be done.
here are a number of things we need information about," he said, adding that a startup this week is unlikely.
t has also said damage to wells may be greater than first believed, and could not give an estimated start date.
agne gnedal, director general of the safety authority, said his staff is working intensely on reviewing a startup proposal submitted by tatoil this week, but needs more information.
ut if everything goes according to plan, we should be back in normal operation before ec. 31," he said.
he proposed solution would permit the company in the short term to pump up some 100,000 bpd while waiting for the platform repairs to be completed.
hat closure has slashed orway's oil production by an additional 140,000 bpd.
ll other considerations will have to wait," eivind einertsen, a senior tatoil executive, said in a statement.
"e are trying to stabilize the situation," he said, adding that the problem appeared to have been fixed four hours after the incident began.
" startup depends in part on maintaining our schedule for the remaining work," said ivind einertsen, tatoil's senior vice president for the ampen cluster of fields, which includes norre.
arathon was similarly mum on when production aboard its platform would restart.
"t means that we lost control of the pressure in one of the rigs," after a gas leak around 7:00 pm (1800 ), he said.
nce repairs are made, ide said production could be back to normal within a day.
tatoil was founded by the government in 1972 to oversee the nation's petroleum interests, and employs about 17,000 people in 25 countries.
tatoil was founded by the government in 1972 to oversee the nation's petroleum interests, and employs about 17,000 people in 25 countries.
tatoil was founded by the government in 1972 to oversee the nation's petroleum interests, and employs about 17,000 people in 25 countries.
"he safety aspect has top priority at the moment," einertsen said.
"ork to secure the well on the norre  platform ... continued all through the night, and is still going well and according to plan today ...
"t will take a lot of time to reach the targeted production levels (of 100,000 bpd) because the installations have been closed for a long time and reopening them requires proceeding with caution," company spokeswoman jersti orstoel told .
tatoil however said it could take some time to reach even such limited production goals.
he smaller igdis, located near norre  and whose production transits norre, was also closed.
ts satellite platform igdis, whose production transits norre, was also closed.
he agency that oversees health and environmental issues in the oil sector, etroleumtilsyn, must also give the green light for production to resume, which could delay matters even further.
ight, sweet crude for anuary delivery was up 26 cents at $49.70 a barrel on the ew ork ercantile xchange on onday.
 team of about 30 workers was tackling the problem.
einertsen described the incident as "serious and rare".
ide told ow ones ewswires that there was a small chance of completing repairs on riday "but the weather window isn't looking good."
n ondon, the anuary contract for rent crude rose 98 cents to $45.53 on the nternational etroleum xchange.
"afety is our biggest priority right now.
he also said the chances of repairs on aturday also looked "very hit-and-run."
"ll other considerations will have to wait."
hree helicopters and four ships were helping evacuate the rest of the staff, orwegian news agency  said.
e said some of the information must come from the field itself, and that a fierce storm has prevented the gathering of crucial data.
he norre field is operated by tatoil, which owns a 14.39 percent share, as well as the orwegian state-owned group etoro, xxonobil of the nited tates, demitsu etroleum of apan,  ea of ermany, otal of rance, merada ess of the  and nterprise il of ritain.
"e must also complete the planned inspection program with a positive result.