Zimpfer, who has been part of Yushchenko's medical team since he was first rushed to Rudolfinerhaus in early September, said that Yushchenko's blood dioxin level was "more than 1,000 times" the upper limits of normal and that his initial severe abdominal pain suggested that he had eaten the poison.
Doctors at the Austrian clinic had declined for weeks to issue a finding on the cause of the illness, but said Saturday that tests conducted in an Amsterdam hospital had confirmed the presence of dioxin.
"There is no doubt about the fact that the disease was caused by poisoning of dioxin," said Michael Zimpfer, director of the Vienna Rudolfinerhaus hospital, where Yushchenko has been receiving treatment.
"This is the work of the government," Yushchenko said upon his return to Kiev late Sunday from an Austrian clinic where doctors confirmed for the first time that he had somehow swallowed massive amounts of the toxin that can cause cancer and death.
Returning to Kiev after checking out of a clinic in Vienna, Austria, Yushchenko said he was sure that authorities were responsible for the dioxin poisoning that had disfigured his face and caused other symptoms.
The illness that disfigured the face of opposition presidential candidate Viktor Yushchenko resulted from poisoning by the toxic substance dioxin, which might have been placed deliberately in his food, Austrian doctors who treated him told reporters in Vienna on Saturday.
"I know the Ukraine government is investigating this matter fully, as they should," the spokesman said after doctors at the clinic confirmed for the first time that Yushchenko had swallowed relatively large amounts of dioxin.
In an Oct. 7 statement to Ukraine's parliament, Volodymyr Sivkovych, chairman of an ad hoc commission that looked into Yushchenko's illness, reported on the opposition leader's activities the day before he became ill. On the evening of Sept. 5, Yushchenko first had dinner at the summer house of a businessman, where sushi was served that had not been refrigerated for more than three hours, Sivkovych said.
There was "no doubt" that Yushchenko's disease "has been caused by a case of poisoning by dioxin," Dr. Michael Zimpfer, president of the Rudolfinerhaus Hospital said at a news conference on Saturday.
Michael Zimpfer, director of the private Rudolfinerhaus clinic that has been treating Yushchenko, said tests concluded in the last 24 hours prove that dioxin caused the illness that has disfigured the Ukrainian candidate's face.
In Washington, the White House urged Ukraine to fully investigate the "terrible" poisonin Meanwhile Yanukovich pressed on with his message that he would no longer represent the ruling regime in the December 26 vote after what he has called Kuchma's "betrayal" of him during the talks with Yushchenko to resolve the standoff over the November 21 poll.
In September, Yushchenko immediately said he had been poisoned, but that charge was lost among the heated political debates and demonstrations in the final weeks of the campaign, which culminated in the disputed election.
Ukrainian opposition leader and presidential candidate Viktor Yushchenko was the victim of poisoning by dioxin, his doctor said Saturday.
Meanwhile, Yushchenko, who is popular in the West, called for an investigation to determine how he was poisoned by dioxin, but said it should be conducted after the Dec. 26 re-run to avoid influencing the results.
Doctors at a Vienna clinic in Austria said tests proved beyond doubt that it was dioxin poisoning that caused a mystery illness in September that left Yushchenko disfigured and in pain.
Speaking to 5,000 supporters in the city of Luhansk before the announcement in Vienna, Yanukovych said of Yushchenko: ``He certainly is ill and I sympathize.
New tests conducted Friday night at a hospital in Vienna, Austria, confirmed that Viktor A. Yushchenko, the Ukrainian opposition candidate for president, had been poisoned with dioxin, providing an explanation for a broad array of painful and disfiguring conditions that plagued him during the past three months of the campaign.
"Our assistance is to support free and fair elections that reflect the will of the people, and that's what we do all over the world," the spokesman said.
"Our assistance is to support free and fair elections that reflect the will of the people, and that's what we do all over the world," he said.
The doctors, Zimpfer said, ``suspect the involvement of an external party,'' and that the dioxin was given orally.
The poisoning of Ukraine's opposition icon Viktor Yushchenko overshadowed the country's presidential election campaign Monday after the Western-leaning candidate accused the government of trying to kill him, and his pro-Russia rival denied any knowledge of the case.
Yushchenko was the victim of poisoning by dioxin, his doctor, Michael Zimpfer, said Saturday.
``I think that the heart of Ukraine moved to Independence Square in Kiev over the last three weeks, and old people, young people, everyone, were defending not Yushchenko but they were defending their choice for the type of Ukraine they want to see in the future,'' he said, as his U.S.-born wife, Kateryna Chumachenko, translated.
After the diagnosis, Ukraine's prosecutor general's office said it had reopened the criminal investigation that it closed in November for lack of evidence at the time.
The United States on Monday urged the Ukrainian government to fully investigate the "terrible" poisoning of opposition leader Viktor Yushchenko with the highly toxic substance dioxin.
``There is no doubt about the fact that Mr. Yushchenko's disease has been caused by dioxin poisoning,'' he told reporters at a news conference at the clinic.
"It was terrible news to hear, and it's certainly disturbing reports," White House spokesman Scott McClellan said when he was asked at a news briefing about the US reaction to the poisoning of Ukrainian presidential candidate Yushchenko.
The Ukrainian prosecutor-general's office announced Sunday it had reopened an investigation into allegations that presidential candidate Viktor Yushchenko was poisoned, after doctors in Austria confirmed he had ingested dioxin.
Speaking to reporters Sunday at the private Rudolfinerhaus clinic in Vienna, where doctors announced Saturday that they had confirmed dioxin poisoning, Yushchenko said a full-scale investigation should wait until after Dec. 26, when he faces Yanukovych in a repeat election.
But some doctors point out that it is conceivable Yushchenko had the bad luck to develop a rare illness, difficult to diagnose, at the height of the campaign.
In response to reports the US is intervening Ukraine's election and funding the opposition, McClellan claimed that "We do not and have not supported any particular candidate in Ukraine's presidential election."
Zimpfer said that Yushchenko's dioxin levels have returned to normal and that he probably would leave the clinic Sunday or Monday.
"If the prosecutor general keeps to the law and acts accordingly, then soon Ukraine and the whole world will find out who did this," said Yushchenko, who underwent a new round of tests at the clinic over the weekend.
Doctors at the Rudolfinerhaus clinic determined that the pro-West opposition leader was poisoned by ingesting a dioxin dose that exceeded 1,000 times the safe limit -- possibly by eating spiked soup -- causing his face to be disfigured weeks before the first round of a presidential vote.
The effects of dioxin poisoning are swift as the substance rapidly is absorbed by the body, Zimpfer said.
``This official confirmation is another opportunity to speak the truth to the Ukrainian people and to show one more time the dirty methods that were used by the authorities,'' said Yuri Yekhanurov, a member of parliament, in a telephone interview.
Yushchenko has previously charged that the hardline regime of outgoing President Leonid Kuchma poisoned him to take him out of the contest against Prime Minister Viktor Yanukovich, whom the opposition leader comfortably led in the polls when he was struck.
In interviews this week, the Austrian doctors were quick to emphasize that, scientifically, they could not say that the candidate had been poisoned.
The pro-Western reformer is engaged in a bitter presidential contest with Prime Minister Viktor Yanukovych and has alleged since suddenly falling ill in September that he was poisoned in an assassination attempt.
``I don't want all of us to have the impression that the Yanukovych campaign and Yanukovych himself have relaxed and stopped fighting,'' Yulia Tymoshenko, a key opposition leader, said at a Saturday news conference in Kiev, the capital.
``It is possible that we only found the dioxin,'' he said.
"We have provided assistance to organizations supporting such a process in Ukraine, and that includes NGOs, as well as other international organizations, but that's to assist in voter education and political party training, and it is also assistance which is made available to all political parties in Ukraine."
Doctors at Rudolfinerhaus said they did not test Yushchenko for dioxin in part because his skin changes were much milder in September, not suggestive of dioxin.
Asked whether he had reported his findings to the Ukrainian authorities, Zimpfer replied that Austrian justice officials have been in direct contact with Ukraine since Yushchenko's second hospitalization in late September.
Serhiy Rudenko, a spokesman, said then that no poisoning agents had been found in forensic medical tests and that there was no data to prove deliberate poisoning or the use of biological weapons against Yushchenko.
The White House Monday urged Ukraine to fully investigate the "terrible" poisoning of opposition leader Viktor Yushchenko with the highly toxic substance dioxin.
He continued: "As I've said to the family, If this is a poisoning, it's going to be very tricky and tough to discover.
``The criminal investigation does not fit within our purview but ... there is suspicion of third-party involvement,'' said Michael Zimpfer, director of Vienna's private Rudolfinerhaus clinic, where the candidate went for treatment in September after falling ill while campaigning.
From late that evening until 2:00 a.m. the next day, ``Yushchenko was visiting the summer house of Volodymyr Satsyuk, the first deputy chairman of the Security Service of Ukraine,'' he said.
They arrived in Ukraine, and, after a few hours, Zimpfer returned to Vienna, leaving Yushchenko in the care of another Austrian doctor.
Yushchenko will face Yanukovich on December 26 in a rerun vote after the supreme court stripped the prime minister of his victory in the November 21 runoff because of massive ballot fraud.
"We weren't there and we will have to leave that to the legal authorities to decide," he said.
The Austrian doctors, addressing reporters in Vienna on Saturday, said Yushchenko's long-term prognosis was good, though it could take several years for his face to heal.
Zimpfer said the doctors did not know for sure whether Yushchenko had been poisoned by just one substance or by a combination of substances.
Yushchenko and his aides had long insisted that he had been poisoned, a charge that his opponents ridiculed, saying that the once-telegenic candidate had been stricken by bad sushi or too much drink.
Yushchenko contends he was poisoned in an assassination attempt by ``government officials'' who feared that he would defeat Prime Minister Viktor Yanukovych in runoff elections held on Nov. 21.
"Look at my face," Yushchenko told the Ukrainian parliament on Sept. 21, after his first stint in the Vienna hospital.
Damage to the digestive system suggested that the poison had been ingested orally, he said.
Yushchenko and his doctors made a difficult choice: They decided to place an epidural catheter between his shoulder blades into the membranes of the upper spine so that medicines could be delivered to the nerves in his back without compromising his mental abilities.
Under Ukrainian law, if a presidential election is so flawed that it is impossible to determine the result, it is possible for the incumbent to remain in power while new balloting is organized.
The candidate refused a biopsy of his face -- which doctors suggested to try to narrow down the causes -- because he did not want to campaign with stitches.
Yushchenko fell sick Sept. 6, the day after having late-night food and drinks with the head of the Security Service of Ukraine, among other people.
"There were high concentrations of dioxin, most likely orally administered," said Zimpfer, director of the Vienna Rudolfinerhaus hospital, where Yushchenko has been receiving treatment."
Ukrainian presidential hopeful Viktor Yushchenko was poisoned with dioxin, most likely intentionally, doctors in Vienna who have been struggling to diagnose his mystery illness confirmed Saturday.
Yushchenko supporters, however, already believed he had been poisoned, and it was not immediately clear how many Yanukovych backers would be willing to believe the Vienna doctors.
Yanukovich said Monday he could not have known anything about the alleged government plot because as prime minister he did not oversee the security structures that could have possibly orchestrated the attack.
Yushchenko, a pro-Western opposition leader engaged in a bitter presidential contest, has alleged since suddenly falling ill in September that he was poisoned in an assassination attempt intended to eliminate a key critic of Ukraine's government.
On Friday, Yushchenko said: "It is my growing conviction that what happened to me was an act of political reprisal against a politician in opposition.
Yushchenko first checked into the Vienna clinic Sept. 10, at which point, according to Zimpfer, he had been ill for five days.
Paul M. Wax, with the American College of Toxicology, said two scientists he met in Volgograd, Russia, in 1992, told him that during the Soviet era they had investigated the potential of developing dioxin as a chemical weapon.
Michael Zimpfer, the clinic's director, thanked doctors from around the world who had helped ``to clarify the difficult Yushchenko illness that has not been observed anywhere else beforehand.''
Doctors said Saturday that damage to Yushchenko's digestive system suggested the poison had been ingested.
"We do not and have not supported any particular candidate in Ukraine's presidential election," he said.
When the once-robust, telegenic man was wheeled in through the sliding glass doors of the plush Rudolfinerhaus hospital in early September, he was severely ill, conscious but groggy and complaining of terrible abdominal pain.
Ukraine has been in a political crisis since the Nov. 21 presidential election, victory in which has been claimed by both pro-Moscow candidate, Prime Minister Viktor Yanukovich, and pro- Western candidate, opposition leader Viktor Yushchenko.
"I am insisting that law enforcement agencies get to the bottom of this," he said when asked to respond to Yushchenko's charges.
Dioxin, a waste product of various industrial chemical processes, is a highly toxic chemical that remains in the body for years after exposure, so doctors were able to test their patient Friday, long after the near-fatal poisoning occurred.
Initially the poison often produces severe abdominal pains, nausea and vomiting -- and, in the long term, very high doses can produce the kind of skin cysts and discoloration that have disfigured Yushchenko.
Well, we don't seem to know, although one prosecutor said once that the killer has already been found, and that his surname begins with the letter K. He wasn't brave enough to give us a few more letters.''
The condition occurs months to years after exposure, when the body seeks to eliminate residue of the chemical through the skin.
``If this dose had been higher, it may have caused death,'' Zimpfer said, noting the dioxin could have been administered through food, such as soup.
Some doctors not involved with the Yushchenko case, consulted for their opinions, said that he could be suffering from an unusual immune disease.
``I think it would be appropriate to compare this to the fall of the Soviet Union or the fall of the Berlin Wall.
Ukraine's Supreme Court on Dec. 3 annulled the official results of the runoff, with Yanukovych being the winner and ruled that a re-run would be held on Dec. 26.
The Supreme Court set the revote after ruling that the Nov. 21 balloting, narrowly won by Yanukovych according to the official count, was invalid due to fraud.
The opposition leader has charged that the hardline regime of outgoing President Leonid Kuchma poisoned him to take him out of the December 26 presidential re-vote pitting him against Prime Minister Viktor Yanukovich.
The issue has persisted because of the obvious disfigurement and discoloration of his face, which is swollen and pocked with large bumps and cysts, and is a dusky grayish color.
Opponents dismissively suggested that the cause of Yushchenko's hospitalization was bad sushi or too much alcohol; doctors here said there was no evidence of either.
Yushchenko, who repeatedly claimed that he was poisoned by his political rivals, returned Friday to Austria to receive further treatment.
"The battle against me is being waged by the old government and people who once served in government... those who robbed Ukraine and drove her people to poverty," he said.
So it was that Yushchenko flew back to Kiev with a catheter lodged in his back, escorted by a team of Austria's most elite doctors.
Eight days later, Viktor A. Yushchenko, Ukraine's opposition leader, checked out against medical advice, determined to return to the business of winning the presidential election in Ukraine.
The commission understood this meeting was held at the request of a Yushchenko associate, he said.
Yushchenko fell sick Sept. 6, a day after having late-night food and drinks with Ihor Smeshko, the head of the Security Service of Ukraine, and others.
``I think if the general prosecutor acts according to Ukraine's laws, both the country and the world at large will soon know who did this.''
One notable case occurred in Seveso, Italy, in 1976, when an explosion at a Hoffman-LaRoche chemical plant released a cloud of the herbicide 2,4,5-T, exposing several thousand people to the chemical and an estimated 45 pounds of dioxins, which typically arise as a byproduct in the synthesis of 2,4,5-T.
``It would have been easy to put it in a cream soup, for example,'' he said.
``If you are trying to kill someone quickly, it's not the way to go,'' he said.
But he said law-enforcement authorities would have to determine how the poisoning occurred.
``But if you want to disable someone and want to do it subtly and have it happen days or weeks or months after you have contact with someone, this can do it,'' Schecter said.
``It is impossible to get a dose of dioxin today and get poisoning tomorrow,'' said Yury Ostapenko, head of the Toxicology Information Center at the Russian Health Ministry, speaking on the Echo Moskvy radio station.
``If someone put a drop of pure dioxin in his food, he wouldn't taste it, he wouldn't see it and a few days later he'd start to get sick,'' Schecter said.
Prime Minister Viktor Yanukovych is urging Ukraine's parliament to set up a special commission to see whether the United States financed opposition leader Viktor Yushchenko's presidential campaign, his spokesman said Sunday.
In recent weeks, medical experts in various countries have said the facial condition appeared to be chloracne, which is associated with dioxin poisoning.
"In my job as prime minister, I did not have anything to do with the work of law enforcement agencies.
Yanukovych campaigners rejected suggestions that the prime minister could have been involved in poisoning Yushchenko.
Yushchenko has said that if he is elected president, prosecutors will pursue investigations into the death of Gongadze and other high-profile criminal cases.
Yushchenko fell ill on Sept. 5 and has been treated at the Vienna clinic twice before.
New details of Yushchenko's hospital admissions in Vienna raise disturbing questions: Was the candidate poisoned or infected with some biological agent, and, if so, with what?
It was reported that the US Bush administration has spent more than 65 million US dollars in the past two years to aid political organizations in Ukraine.
``It would have been easy to put it in a cream soup,'' Zimpfer said Saturday.
The regime that was in place for 14 years in Ukraine is now living its last days.''
A spokeswoman for Yushchenko, Irina Gerashchenko, said in a telephone interview that the diagnosis compelled prosecutors to reopen a criminal investigation into his poisoning.
Yushchenko flew to Austria on Friday for further tests at the clinic.
Yushchenko repeatedly claimed that he was poisoned by his political rivals.
He also suffered severe abdominal and back pain and paralysis on the left side of his face.
Gerashchenko said that Yushchenko was continuing to receive treatment from Ukrainian doctors.
Epidural catheters are common for pain relief in childbirth, but they are far riskier when they are placed for longer periods and in the upper back, closer to the brain and vital nerves.
The pain was so severe that doctors had to place a large-bore intravenous line into Yushchenko's chest and essentially nearly anesthetize him with huge doses of opiates.
Yushchenko has always been vague on the topic of who tried to poison him.
``What happened to me was an attempt to politically destroy a politician with opposing views,'' he said at a news conference in Kiev on Friday, shortly before his departure.
Yushchenko's dioxin levels in blood and tissue samples taken in September but only recently tested specifically for that substance were at least 1,000 times higher than normal, a level Zimpfer said required a dose of just milligrams.
"This is a very delicate question and one should not be accusing anyone at this point -- this should be determined by the investigation," he said.
Arnold Schecter, a dioxin expert at the University of Texas School of Public Health at Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas, said dioxins can be highly effective poison in people who are sensitive to their effects.
``They will try everything for the presidential elections not to happen, or not to have a result.''
At Kiev airport, Yushchenko said it should not take too long to reach a conclusion in the attempted murder case.
Speaking to a rally in the eastern city of Luhansk before the Vienna announcement, Yanukovych expressed sympathy for Yushchenko.
This is one-hundredth of the problems that I've had.
Yanukovych's campaign manager, Taras Chornovyl, has rejected any possibility that the prime minister was involved in the alleged poisoning.
Nikolai Korpan, the doctor who oversaw Yushchenko's treatment, said no ``functional damage'' would remain as a result of the dioxin exposure.
Internal examinations of the intestine using an endoscope found that he had ulcerations -- essentially bleeding abrasions -- of the stomach and throughout his intestine and bowel as well.
"The United States strongly supports a democratic process that reflects the will of the people of Ukraine."
Asked about the diagnosis, made at an Austrian clinic, spokesman Scott McClellan replied: "It was terrible news to hear, and it's certainly disturbing."
In less than two weeks he was back, crippled by excruciating back pain that required such huge doses of morphine to control that he almost ended up on a ventilator.
``Plus there are very few labs in the world that can accurately detect dioxin in the blood.''
"We have proved the source of his problem, and we clearly suspect third party involvement," Zimpfer said in a subsequent interview.
There is ``no logic in such an accusation,'' he said.
Yushchenko and his doctors agreed on a risky plan: Doctors threaded a small tube through the skin of his upper back, into his spinal canal, so he could receive constant pain-killing medication while campaigning.
Indeed, the doctors had become increasingly suspicious that foul play, possibly an unusual poisoning, could be the cause of their patient's problems, a charge that Gerashchenko repeated.
Doctors in Vienna declined to speculate on exactly how Yushchenko was poisoned.
The face of the once youthful-looking Yushchenko, 50, was mysteriously transformed into a blotch of lesions after he reached Austria.
``Friends, this is not a problem of cuisine as such,'' Yushchenko said then.
``I am convinced that this is the work of the authorities, absolutely convinced,'' Yushchenko told reporters at Kiev airport.
"I know the Ukraine government is investigating this matter fully, as they should," McClellan said.
The revote was set after the Supreme Court ruled the Nov. 21 balloting, narrowly won by Yanukovych, invalid because of fraud.
The explosive allegation of attempted murder, now backed by fresh medical evidence, could have an unpredictable effect on a repeat presidential runoff election pitting Yushchenko against Prime Minister Viktor Yanukovych on Dec. 26.
US officials say the activities do not amount to interference in Ukraine's election but are part of the 1 billion dollars the US State Department spends each year trying to build democracy worldwide.
"There were high concentrations of dioxin, most likely orally administered," the doctor told a news conference at the hospital.
Saturday's announcement potentially raised the stakes by increasing the possibility that if the poisoning were an assassination attempt, those responsible might be caught and punished under a Yushchenko presidency.
But the doctors said that Yushchenko's facial disfigurement would remain for a long time as follow-up treatments continue.
Yushchenko has suffered problems that affected several internal organs and caused severe back pain, according to his doctors.
On Sunday Yushchenko refused to name any specific officials and said the inquiry should determine the culprit.
He was still on "plenty" of medication, said Zimpfer.
Hospital director Michael Zimpfer said Yushchenko's blood contained more than 1,000 times the normal amount of dioxin.
They are a component of the Vietnam-era defoliant Agent Orange and many researchers have labeled them a cause of cancer and other diseases among people who were exposed to the defoliant.
An extremely unusual cause of poisoning, dioxin exposure most often comes from industrial accidents where it is inhaled or absorbed through the skin.
Already, doctors noticed that he was developing odd lesions on his face and trunk.
``I don't want this factor to influence the election in some way -- either as a plus or a minus,'' Yushchenko said.
from bottles that were uncorked in the presence of the company,'' Sivkovych reported.
Yushchenko, 50, spent a period at the Rudolfinerhaus clinic in September and October after falling ill for unknown reasons.
"In this case, absence of evidence is not evidence of absence," he said.
Political intrigue is not the norm at Rudolfinerhaus, an elite private hospital that caters to wealthy Austrians and foreigners.
This is not a problem of political cuisine as such.
But it is not known to produce pain.
What is his current state of health, in the middle of a pivotal battle for power?
The diagnosis was based on clinical observations, skin changes and findings from tissue and blood samples, he said.
But dioxin and related toxic chemicals are detectable in the body years after exposure.
But the medical team became so concerned about the possibility of an unconventional agent that they consulted biological and chemical weapons experts.
More medicine would have required that Yushchenko be placed on a respirator, Zimpfer said.
"I sympathize as a person with Mr Yushchenko that he is sick.
Dioxin is a by-product of industrial processes such as waste incineration and chemical and pesticide manufacturing.
"He was severely ill, but this does not all add up to a single disease or even a known syndrome," Zimpfer said.
``A lot of the circumstances are already known,'' he said.
But the compounds are known to cause reproductive and developmental problems, in addition to extreme skin eruptions known as chloracne.
If Yushchenko was deliberately given dioxin, it was done by ``someone was very clever and very knowledgeable,'' Schecter said.
"This crisis showed his true character and he began defending the interests of himself and his family."
The prosecutor general's office said he died of spinal trauma as a result of being beaten.
The Interfax news agency reported Monday that the prosecutor general's office has re-opened a criminal investigation into the case after closing an earlier inquiry.
That was not my competence," Yanukovich told reporters when asked to comment on Yushchenko's charges.
"I went with him because I had serious security concerns and I wanted to make sure he was handled properly," he said.
Yushchenko outlined his allegations of an attempted assassination in a Sept. 21 speech to Parliament.
Authorities have denied the charge, and some government supporters have ridiculed it.
Multiple blood tests were abnormal, doctors here say; his skin was covered with odd-looking lesions; and his digestive tract was dotted with ulcers from top to bottom.
Police were never able to determine how the poisoning occurred, including if it was deliberate or accidental, Paepke said.
Yanukovych was officially declared the winner of the Nov. 21 vote.
Another case occurred in 1997 in Vienna, where two employees of a textile institute developed chloracne on their bodies, according to Olaf Paepke, a scientist at a Hamburg institute, who conducted chemical analysis for the investigation.
While dioxin poisoning is not medically unknown, it typically occurs through environmental exposure, when it is inhaled or absorbed through the skin.
Yushchenko was discharged three days later, leaving with a retinue of doctors and cartons of medical supplies.
He said tests showed the toxin was taken orally.
Dioxin is a byproduct of industrial processes such as waste incineration and chemical and pesticide manufacturing.
Dr. Michael Zimpfer, the medical director at the hospital here, personally supervised Yushchenko.
The employees had levels of dioxin in their systems thousands of times higher than normally found.
It's not going to cause someone to keel over on a battlefield,'' but could cause long-term illness.
He arrived first on Sept. 10, severely ill and unable to walk, after five days of terrible abdominal pain.
Before the doctors' confirmation, presidential administration authorities have said that Yushchenko may have fallen ill from eating spoiled food or perhaps drinking too much bad liquor.
A former police officer, Ihor Honcharov, said last year that he had information that police working with a criminal gang had abducted the journalist on orders from Kravchenko, who was following orders from Kuchma.
Honcharov had been arrested on charges of being a member of a rogue police gang that had been involved in contract killing.
Dermatologists at Rudolfinerhaus initially suggested that the facial lesions could represent a slightly unusual case of a well-known condition called rosacea, where the face becomes swollen and lumpy.
"At this point his diagnosis is just a description of all his symptoms."
As he gradually recovered strength, he opted to get back to the campaign trail.
Authorities have denied the charge, and some pro-government politicians have ridiculed it.
Dioxins are not commercially available, Paepke said, but can be obtained through industry contacts or made in a laboratory by people with the proper skills.
The most visible symptom has been disfigurement of his face with pockmarks, cysts and darkened areas.
A tiny, unnoticeable amount placed in food is sufficient to cause severe illness, he said.
Yushchenko said massive street protests in central Kiev's Independence Square, which helped prompt parliament to enact electoral reforms aimed at preventing fraud in the revote, had brought historic change to Ukraine.
The prosecutor-general's office dropped its initial investigation of the allegation in late October.
Yushchenko supporters said the finding bore out what they had long believed.
His opponents have dismissed the charge, saying he got sick after gorging himself on bad sushi and too much alcohol.
He campaigned with the tube in place for a week, attending several large rallies, according to his press secretary, Irina Gerashchenko.
They are a common byproduct in the manufacture of many industrial chemicals, and are also a common contaminant from waste incineration.
McClellan also denied anew that US money that went to non-governmental organizations (NGOs) in Ukraine ended up supporting the Western-leaning Yushchenko directly.
Ukraine was plunged into a political turmoil after the presidential runoff on Nov. 21, when both candidates claimed victory.
There is "no logic in such an accusation," said Taras Chornovyl, Yanukovych's campaign manager.
``We don't think about it as an acute poison that can kill you.
Ukraine's Supreme Court has ordered to have a new runoff vote on Dec. 26.
But cases of dioxin poisoning are extremely rare.
But Zimpfer said Yushchenko's skin nodules no longer indicated that disease.
Ten days later, the candidate returned, after three days of what he called excruciating back pain.
"But if someone said to me, 'Look what we found!'
Yanukovych has often accused the United States of meddling in Ukraine's internal affairs.
Let the specialists work on that.''
Let the specialists work on that.''
Gongadze disappeared the night of Sept. 16, 2000, shortly after going out to empty the trash.
Gerashchenko said tests for such substances had still not been performed.
In 2000, (campaigning journalist) Georgi Gongadze was sitting on the balcony over there and writing political reports.
As for the reasons, I know nothing.
As for the reasons, I know nothing.
Wax expressed doubts that dioxin could be used in that way.
``I tasted some medicine on his breath, on his lips,'' she said in an interview on ABC's ``Good Morning America.''
Some people in the opposition camp remained nervous whether the Dec. 26 balloting really would take place.
For now, Yushchenko is ``fully capable of working,'' said Nikolai Korpan, another doctor.
The country's Supreme Court soon overturned that finding, citing widespread poll fraud, and a new election will be held on Dec. 26.
But none of that would affect Yushchenko's political aspirations today.
Sonya Yee of the Times' Vienna bureau contributed to this report.
The security service head, Ihor Smeshko, was also present, he said.
Such cysts can persist for years after the initial dose, as do several other more subtle medical effects.
Last week a British toxicologist, Dr. John Henry, suggested that Yushchenko's symptoms were consistent with dioxin poisoning, which causes a severe form of acne called chloracne.
``We hadn't seen anything like that for the past 100 years,'' Yuschenko said.
``I plan to live for a long time and I plan to live happily,'' he said.
The doctors gave him supportive care, like intravenous fluid and a restricted food intake to rest the digestive tract.
Asked whether he was sure that no US assistance ended up directly helping Yushchenko, McClellan replied: "Yes."
Ulcers are typically not spread out in that way.
Initial testing showed that he had a high white cell count, as well as elevated liver and pancreas enzymes, suggesting inflammation of those organs.
We are talking about the Ukrainian political kitchen where assassinations are ordered."
"He feels much better than he did two months ago, but he's far from ideal," she said.
"I was deeply disappointed in this man," he told reporters.
His appearance has continued to worsen, raising public concern about his health despite his claims he is fully recovering.
"Evidence of American support (for Yushchenko) has surfaced more than once.
"A poisoning without the poison is like a murder without a gun," Zimpfer said.
The aim, naturally, was to kill me."
His tests were negative for all the obvious possibilities, like hepatitis caused by a virus.
Yushchenko cited the suspicious but unexplained deaths of several prominent figures, including Vyacheslav Chornovil, a former presidential candidate who died in a traffic accident several years ago.
``In 1999 Vyacheslav Chornovil was here alive,'' he said.
``Dioxins do not belong to immediate-effect poisons: poisoning develops for years and decades.''
``It was never on anyone's list,'' said Wax, who now teaches courses on chemical terrorism.
``Yushchenko started to complain of splitting headaches early on Sept.
In Vienna, Yushchenko struck an upbeat note Saturday.
Scleromyxedema, for instance, is an extremely rare progressive disorder that produces facial symptoms much like Yushchenko's.
Documented cases of acute dioxin poisoning are rare.
"If you survive the initial attempt, you can do all right," Zimpfer said.
Yushchenko's wife, Kateryna Chumachenko, said she noticed a strange taste on his lips when she kissed him that night.
``The criminal investigation does not fall within our purview,'' he added.
In the months that followed, many who experienced heavy exposures developed chloracne.
Debate over dioxins' potency as a poison, as opposed to a cancer-causing agent, has swirled for decades.
He brushed it away, saying there is nothing.''
Tapes purportedly recorded secretly by a former Kuchma bodyguard disclose that the president made repeated complaints about Gongadze to his former interior minister, Yuri Kravchenko.
An autopsy showed that he died within hours.
Dioxin causes a strong predisposition toward developing cancer later in life and can also affect the body's fat metabolism.
Scans showed that his liver, pancreas and intestine were, indeed, swollen.
They are not going to use some regular household agent."
``He really is a sick person,'' Yanukovych replied.
``Food was served on common plates, and drinks were served .
Because opiates depress respiratory functions, his breathing rate slowed, and his vital signs had to be constantly monitored.
Therefore, Yanukovych is asking for a parliamentary investigation," said Yanukovych's spokesman, Oleh Ternovsky.
``This question will require a great deal of time and serious investigation.
The left eye is bloodshot and sometimes waters.
``We are talking about a Ukrainian political kitchen, where assassinations are ordered!''
They say no American funds were sent directly to Ukrainian political parties.
A Russian government specialist challenged the Vienna doctors' findings.
Holley reported from Kiev, Ukraine, and Yee reported from Vienna.
Gongadze's death has been the darkest shadow trailing Ukrainian President Leonid Kuchma.
They tested only for common agents, and found none.
Zimpfer provided extensive details of Yushchenko's hospitalizations.
Many people near the plant developed severe skin problems within hours.
Its source was again a mystery, since related lab tests and scans were normal.
The symptoms include severe stomach ulcers, spinal pains and disfiguring.
Dioxins are a group of organic compounds that contain chlorine.
Europe's most illustrious doctors were stumped; the patient's many symptoms defied a unifying diagnosis.
"He is perfect condition, in perfect mental shape."
Once again, a week of testing found no medical explanation.
``We pretend we don't know who killed him with a Kamaz truck.
``I had a little talk with him concerning this topic.
... Over the last three weeks, you have seen a different country, a different nation.
Staff Writers Rob Stein, Rick Weiss, Juliet Eilperin, Joby Warrick and John Burgess in Washington contributed to this report.
Scientists debate whether a huge one-timedose could be delivered as a poison.
"We suspect a cause triggered by a third party."
``I am getting better ... every day.''