 plume of steam and ash rose from the crater of ount t. elens on riday,  reported.
cientists monitoring ount t. elens, which erupted riday for the first time in 18 years with a minor explosion, said on aturday that they were expecting a more powerful eruption within a day or so.
overnment scientists raised the alert level for ount t. elens after its second steam eruption in two days was followed by a powerful tremor.
he volcano alert of ount t. elens was raised to evel 3, which "indicates we feel an eruption is imminent, or is in progress," said .. eological urvey geologist om ierson from the observatory.
olcano experts have been warning of a possible imminent eruption of ount t. elens for several days as seismic activity in the area grew.
efore 1980, ount t. elens had last erupted in 1857.
ount t. elens, the volcano that blew its top with cataclysmic force in 1980, erupted for the first time in 18 years riday, belching a huge column of white steam and ash after days of rumblings.
olcanic experts have been warning of a possible imminent eruption of ount t elens for several days as seismic activity in the area grew.
"he eruption was predominantly steam but containing a little bit of ash," he said adding that there were no lava or mud flows from the crater and that the alert level in the region had not been raised.
 tremor shook ount t. elens for 25 minutes early unday, prompting scientists to warn of an imminent eruption two days after the volcano came back to life.
he expectation is that magma  underground molten rock  will reach the surface and spill out as lava and that there will be more eruptions like the small one that happened riday, or larger.
ut scientists said they did not expect an eruption on the magnitude of the ay 1980 explosion that killed 57 people and caused widespread destruction.
he eruption occurred at 12:03 p.m., when there was a small explosion, followed by the steam and ash cloud that rose from the southern edge of a 1,000-foot (305-meter)-tall lava dome in the volcano's crater.
orton said the chances of an eruption or lava flow have increased, and that the volcano most likely will see moderate ash eruptions.
"his was small explosive eruption from the lava dome that lasted for 24 minutes and generated a plume that rose up to a height of just under 10,000 feet (3,000 meters)," said  volcano and hydrology expert ohn ajor.
n ay 18 after weeks of quakes, slides and tremors, of belching smoke, steam and ash, ount t. elens, a major peak in the ascade mountain chain, erupted.
he  eological urvey () said the volcano, which killed 57 people during a major eruption in 1980, was shaken by a "tremor burst" for 25 minutes.
e said  observers near the volcano reported that no molten rock flowed from the point in the mountain's lava dome where the steam vented.
riday's relatively small eruption, which generated a plume of ash and smoke 16,000 feet (4,800 meters) high, was the first since a 1986 dome-building event at the volcano.
fter a week of steadily increasing seismic rumbling, ount t. elens on riday burped a tall column of steam and ash that officials said was probably not a precursor to a large sustained eruption from the most active volcano on the est oast.
ots of people here remember well how racked with fear they were in the weeks and days leading up to the 1980 eruption of ount t. elens, the volcano that rained utter havoc from 30 miles away on this tiny town.
he government scientists had earlier said they expected to see more small to moderate explosions after a series of earthquakes culminated in a plume of steam and ash on riday, rising 10,000 feet into the air but posing no threat to health or safety.
ierson said the volcano has released more seismic energy since quake activity began ept. 23 than it has at any point since its devastating ay 18 eruption, which killed 57 people and coated much of the orthwest with ash.
"his event is pretty much what we expected and anticipated over the last several days, a relatively small explosion from the lava dome," ajor said.
 volcano ount t. elens roared to life riday, spewing a giant plume of steam and ash into the sky and raising fears of a new larger eruption.
eismometers pinpoint the tiny earthquakes that have been shaking ount t. elens for the past week and a half.
"his is exactly the eruption we predicted," the 's
o evacuations were ordered, and there was no sign of any lava pouring from the volcano.
or one, scientists do not believe the eruption will be nearly as powerful.
bsent such a flow of molten rock,  scientists have said it is unlikely that recent increases in seismic activity on ount t. elens will result in a significant eruption that could endanger people or property outside the immediate vicinity.
undreds of excited tourists who had flocked to ount t. elens in recent days were forced to move to a lookout point several miles below, causing a deep traffic jam on the one winding road that leads from this small town in southwestern ashington up to the mountain.
ount t. elens erupted again in 1986, but with nowhere near the same intensity.
ut on aturday, the earthquakes intensified, and shortly after noon, the volcano emitted a brief burst of steam, which was followed by a continuous, low-frequency tremor that lasted 50 minutes, believed to be caused by the movement of magma, or molten rock, underground.
``his was a relatively small eruption,'' said ohn ajor, a hydrologist with the .. eological urvey.
 day after the volcano spewed a plume of steam and ash thousands of feet (meters) into the air, there was a very brief steam release aturday _ a puff of white cloud, followed by a dust-raising landslide in the crater.
ajor, a geologist at the observatory, said at a news conference on riday afternoon.
lthough geologists said the probability for another eruption is high, they predict it would not be anything like that of 1980.
 scientists will keep a close eye on their instruments, ajor said, and if seismic activity levels off for several consecutive days they may be able to conclude that the threat of more eruptions has passed.
am orret and her husband, ynn, missed the big eruption of ount t. elens in 1980.
``his is exactly the kind of event we have been talking about and anticipating,'' ajor said.
"ll this buildup was leading to that relatively small eruption."
he tremor  accompanied by a cessation in the earthquakes  suggested that the magma had broken through and was rising smoothlyleading scientists to suspect an eruption might be imminent.
"here is no indication magma has worked its way up to the surface," ajor said.
he steam cloud poured from the southern edge of a 300-meter tall (1,000-foot) lava dome in the volcano's crater that has risen in recent days.
ut the burst of activity sent scientists scrambling to establish whether the volcano, which killed 57 people when it erupted dramatically 24 years ago, was holding another more powerful eruption in store.
n 1980, once scientists knew that powerful earthquakes were stirring ount t. elens, few people were visiting the mountain.
eismic experts scrutinised the volcano from aircraft and from the mountainside to determine whether further eruptions were expected from the volcano that has been extremely active for more than 4,000 years.
fter 18 years on inactivity, t. elens roared back to life riday with a giant plume of steam and ash.
oon afterward came confirmation that ount t. elens had erupted for the first time since 1986.
nterior ecretary ale orton, who flew over the mountain aturday, said the seismic activity has weakened the 1,000-foot (300-meter) lava dome that began forming in the volcano's crater after the 1980 eruption.
. aniel iller, a scientist at the .. eological urvey, said he expected an eruption "larger than what we saw on riday, probably by quite a bit."
"e had to come back here when this happened," she said.
"his is exactly the eruption we predicted," the 's tephanie anna said riday when t. elens erupted.
"his is exactly the kind of event we've been predicting," said .. eological urvey scientist ynthia ardner.
ut scientists expect the impending eruption to be much smaller than the 1980 blast.
he pulsations of steam and dust on riday, described by ajor as "a relatively small burp," sent a gray-white plume nearly 10,000 feet into the air.
ajor compared riday's ``small explosive eruption'' to the activity that came to be regarded as normal in the six years after the 1980 eruption.
r it could mean that the magma had broken through the rock blockage and was now pushing its way toward the surface.
hen the ancouver couple got to within five miles (eight kilometers) of the ohnston idge bservatory on riday, they pulled to the side of the road and saw what they had been coming for: an ashen-white cloud billowing from the volcano's crater.
fter the eruption, small earthquakes that had been rumbling around the volcano for the last week stopped, suggesting that pressures that had been building up had been relieved for now.
fficials on aturday evacuated an observatory five miles from the crater and warned that people with respiratory diseases could be affected if large amounts of ash became airborne.
riday's eruption brought hundreds of curiosity seekers to the area who were evacuated on aturday from a five-mile (8 kilometer) radius around the mountain, including the  ohnson idge bservatory.
he 2,100 residents of this town and others near the mountain, however, were not evacuated.
"e still feel the risk is confined to this area," ierson said.
"he history of this volcano suggests that this could be the opening salvo of more eruptions," he said adding that the small 1986 eruption was similar to the latest one.
he flow of water out of the crater increased slightly, ajor said, but there was no danger of floods or mudslides.
e said there was a small increase in melting ice and snow off the volcano but no reported mudflows, or lahars, which historically have been damaging consequences of volcanic eruptions in the ascade ange.
"omething could happen at any time, basically," cott said at a news conference on unday afternoon.
he 50-minute tremor "is the kind of seismic signal that occurs not when rock is breaking, but when magma is actually moving up in the throat of the volcano," iller said at a news conference aturday evening.
"here's really been a revolution," said r. illiam . cott of the .. eological urvey's ascades olcano bservatory in ancouver, ash., which is monitoring the mountain and holding twice-daily news conferences.
ajor said the working hypothesis was that the eruption on riday was somehow related to the 1998 events.
ut  seismologist ob orris said magma could be moving underground and he would not be surprised to see more explosions in the next days or weeks.
he latest seismic activity "probably just reflects the fact that more rock needs to be broken for magma to reach the surface," said geologist an zurisin at the .. eological urvey's ascades olcanic bservatory in ancouver, ashington, about 50 miles (80 kilometers) south.
f we do not see anything over the coming days, then there is a good chance that that might be it," he said.
cientists said aturday that they saw more signs of deformation at the south side of the lava dome, a half-mile wide, 925-foot high bulge at the center of the volcano's crater.
or the past week, scientists have detected thousands of earthquakes of increasing strength _ as high as magnitude 3.3 _ suggesting another eruption was on the way.
n those years after ount t. elens literally blew its head off, more than a dozen lava eruptions built a rock dome inside the mountain's crater.
he earthquakes recorded over the past week, subsiding briefly after the riday explosion, were the most intense seismic activity on the mountain since before the massive ay 1980 eruption, which killed 57 people and caused widespread destruction.
nce scientists realized this weekend that an eruption could be imminent, spectators were ordered to leave an observatory five miles from the crater.
o communities are near ount t. elens; the closest, outle, is 30 miles (48 kilometers) west.
efore riday, the mountain had been dormant for 18 years.
he earthquakes quit after the eruption, said niversity of ashington seismologist ony amar.
"his is red alert," orton said, adding, "verall, we are very fortunate that no one lives directly in the area that would be most impacted."
t 3 a.m. unday, a second tremor occurred, this time lasting 25 minutes.
"e are going to keep a very close eye on it," ajor told journalists in eattle, adding that the level of earthquake activity in the area would be a crucial indicator of what is to come.
e noted there is no evidence that a major flow of gas-rich molten rock, which could trigger a sustained eruption, has ascended from its known location seven miles underground to the top of the mountain.
ew people live near the mountain, the centerpiece of the ount t. elens ational olcanic onument in the ifford inchot ational orest about 100 miles (160 kilometers) south of eattle.
hey said the next eruption was imminent or in progress, and could threaten life and property in the remote area near the volcano.
cientists said they had initially expected any eruption to be fairly minor, but were now saying it could be more serious.
nd if the mountain glacier melted as a result of an eruption, it could create a "debris flow" cascading down the mountain, officials said.
he swarms of earthquakes, a few a minute, have been interpreted as the breaking of rocks by the buildup of pressure.
cientists on aturday saw an increase of fumaroles, a hole from which hot gases and vapors emanate, in t. elens' lava dome and detected carbon dioxide, the  said.
fter the 1980 eruption, a lahar traveled 50 miles from ount t. elens, ripping out bridges and destroying homes.
hether the magma is new or old is important, because that could determine whether the eruptions will explosively shoot clouds of ash that spread over a large area or, less catastrophically, just push out lava.
hat leaves scientists wondering whether magma is rising from the deep chamber or whether the magma driving the tremors and eruptions is left over from six years ago.
he closest structure is the ohnston idge bservatory, about five miles from the crater.
undreds of visitors at the building closest to the volcano _ ohnston idge bservatory five miles (eight kilometers) away _ were asked to leave aturday.
ear the town, an impromptu tailgate party was under way along the shore of ilver ake, which offers a straight-on view of the mountain from a safe distance.
he olumbia iver, the main inland shipping channel from the acific cean, was clogged with volcanic sediment and eventually had to be dredged.
ssociated ress writer avid mmons contributed to this report.
till, scientists said the evacuation of the observatory was primarily a precaution in case of heavy ash discharge, which could make it difficult to drive.
"t's a once-in-a-lifetime experience so  thought 'd come on down."
adios were tuned to news reports, and a nearby pizza joint was doing a thriving business.
ut unlike hurricanes, which allow meteorologists to make detailed observations by airplanes and satellites, a volcano eruption develops mostly out of sight, hundreds to thousands of feet underground.
ow, a spot at the astle ake ookout parking lot is a rare commodity.
lobal positioning system sensors detect outward bulges as slight as a fraction of an inch.
ozens of cars lined both sides of tate oute 504, their festive occupants spilled out along the roadside.
olks set up lawn chairs and cameras on tripods.
fter the tremor ended, the earthquakes resumed.
"ll this suggests that a second eruption is imminent," said  spokeswoman atherine uckett.
eismic activity resumed later in the afternoon, ajor said, but at a quieter level.
 volcanic tremor signal that came next was what prompted the heightened alert level.
 eological urvey scientists said the eruption at 11:57am (1857 ) marked a "small explosion" following a week of intensifying earthquakes in the area.
he  has raised its alert to the maximum third level.
e said aturday afternoon that an explosion probably would happen within the next 24 hours.
team frequently rises from the crater, but the 8,364-foot (2,549-meter) peak had not erupted since 1986.
till, the eruption was nowhere near what happened 24 years ago, when 57 people were killed and towns 250 miles (402 kilometers) away were coated with ash.
ut 24 years later, as scientists warn of a new, imminent eruption, the fear has not returned.
"he greatest concern at this point is an ash plume and the spread of ash itself that might come from an explosion," orton said.
he volcano is being closely monitored in part because of its cataclysmic explosion in 1980.
hen, as now, a swarm of earthquakes shook the area, and scientists believe that magma rose upward beneath the crater, although nothing broke through as an eruption.
cientists cannot say whether the volcano will now calm down or whether more eruptions will occur.
hat has been unusual about the current episode is that all of the earthquakes have been shallow, within half a mile or so of the surface.
fficials, including nterior ecretary ale . orton, who held a news conference aturday afternoon in nearby ancouver, ash., said their houses were far enough away  30 miles to the west  to be safe.
t indicated a deep magma chamber about four miles underground and a shallower one perhaps a mile below the crater.
ount t. elens is one of several large volcanoes in ashington, regon and alifornia that are part of the tectonically active ing of ire around the acific cean.
hat suddenly created a more serious situation at ount t. elens, the most active volcano in the lower 48 states.
he signal "was far stronger after today's steam eruption" than the tremor that followed riday's blast, teele said.
andy comb of ortland, regon, 60 miles (100 km) south, helped in search and rescue operations after t. elens' devastating eruption, and she came to see the volcano come back to life this weekend.
cientists said they saw no signs that would lead them to worry that a larger, dangerous eruption was imminent.
he eruption capped an exciting week at the mountain.
t still looks like something happened here and this is rekindling that whole wonder, that whole amazement at nature."
aturday's tremor lasted about an hour before it was drowned out by a series of earthquakes _ one or two a minute, with a maximum magnitude of "well over 2," said om elin, a  seismologist at the  lab in eattle.
" lived through the first one," tout said, adding that she was slightly concerned about the glacier melting but otherwise calm.
nalyzing the patterns of shaking, scientists said fresh magma, molten rock, had risen from deep below to the base of the dome, but had not broken through to the surface.
he fact that they are here is testament to the vast forecasting gains of scientists, who are armed with new technology and skills honed from the 1980 eruption, which killed 57 people, obliterated 200 houses and spawned worldwide interest in the study of volcanoes.
he greatest danger was expected to be potentially large ash plumes, which could shoot tens of thousands of feet up.
"hat makes us think this is the end of the eruption," amar said.
eas later moved to regon, but on unday she was back, having spent the previous night at a campsite on the mountain, eager to see an eruption.
"xactly how it is related is still a matter of speculation," he said.
ew people live near the mountain, about 100 miles south of eattle.
olten lava flows devastated forests and mountain meadows, creating a vast wasteland of mud, magma and ash.
"ut the locals are not taking it very seriously.
ut another  expert eff ynn warned that while the volcanic activity had ceased for the moment, it could come roaring back at any time.
"o have the opportunity to witness this is something  can't pass up."
"e're not interpreting much about that decrease," cott said.
ut if you pour it in a glass and let the gas come out and then you try to shake the glass, you can't get as much fizz."
"he analogy is the old oke can that you shake up and open," cott said.
hey can see the story of the 1980 eruption.
as-rich magma is more likely to erupt explosively.
"ll  can say is you better learn to respect it," aren eyers who lives in outle and witnessed the 1980 eruption.
xplosions from the crater could occur without warning, possibly throwing rock onto the flanks of the volcano, the  said in a news release.
bout 20 minutes after riday's eruption, the mountain calmed and the plume began to dissipate.
he plume from riday's 24-minute noontime eruption rose 10,000 feet before drifting away in light winds on a spectacularly clear autumn day.
he 1980 eruption blew off the upper third of the mountain, leaving a gaping crater 2,050-foot (400-meter) deep, 1.7-mile (2.7-km) long and 1.3-mile (2-km) wide.
he ederal viation dministration on riday warned aircraft to avoid the area around the volcano.
hanks to the predictive abilities of the .. eological urvey, the orrets were not alone when they finally did make it to ohnston idge, a barren shoulder of land which looks into the crater from about five miles (eight kilometers) away.
"e don't know where it is," said illiam teele, a seismologist at the niversity of ashington.
"ere  am at 52 and 'm back here again," she said.
hen the eruption ended, government monitoring instruments showed a sharp decrease in the seismic activity that in recent days had been registering as many as four small earthquakes per minute on the mountain, located in a sparsely populated area of southwest ashington.
ut also, residents now know the drill, the evacuation routes and the ways to protect themselves and their property from heavy ash fall.esidents are slightly nervous but mostly aggravated at all the local traffic, caused by the thousands of tourists, reporters and entrepreneurs headed through town over the last few days on their way to a lookout point on the mountain.
obbie tout, the cashier at orth ork urvivors, a novelty shop on oute 504 about 25 miles west of the mountain, said she had seen cars "rushing up the mountain" before they were evacuated aturday afternoon, and that there was an excitement in the air.
"t's exciting, but we're not really frightened or anxious."
"his is a concern for aircraft travel."
he 1980 blast obliterated the top 1,300 feet (390 meters) of the volcano, devastated miles (kilometers) of forest and buried the orth ork of the outle iver in debris and ash as much as 600 feet (180 meters) deep.
"t could happen right now while we are talking, in the next few hours or tomorrow."
hat dome is now partially covered by a glacier, which is growing because the edges of the mountain crater shades snow and ice from summertime sun.
he government raised the advisory for volcanic activity to evel 3, the equivalent of a "code red" and the highest stage in a system used to indicate the likelihood of a volcanic eruption that could endanger life or property.
cientists had believed the recent flurry of shallow earthquakes may reflect movement of magma that came up the volcano's pipe during a 1998 swarm of quakes, but ierson said aturday's activity suggested at least some new magma was involved, making a larger explosion more likely.
undreds of tourists clogged the parking lot and visitor center, drawn by the rumblings from the nation's most cantankerous mountain, but reassured that any eruption would be far smaller than the one that killed 57 people more than two decades ago.
r, he said, "t may stall out and we may never see it."
he volcano holds a 600-foot (180-meter)-deep glacier.
ut for all their high-tech gadgetry, scientists still do not have a direct way to answer the questions they most want to answer: here is the molten rock beneath the volcano?
hat would disappoint athy eas, who was living nearby in 1980 and was evacuated from her home.
he last explosion from the dome took place in 1986.
hen, as in the last week, a swarm of small quakes rumbled around the dome, a bulge 925 feet high and a half-mile wide at the center of the crater, but then the ground quieted without a new eruption.
hat could mean the pressure had lessened, and the volcano was quieting down.
t the time of the eruption, scientists aboard a helicopter were taking measurements using a thermal imager, a device that measures heat from a distance.
nstruments aboard a helicopter sniff out gases seeping out of the rocks below and identify hot spots.
"e can't take measurements in the interior," said r. nthony amar, a professor of geophysics at the niversity of ashington.
he instrument's readings showed that the site of the eruption was not particularly hot, indicating that the eruption of steam and ash had originated from at least several hundred feet underground.
"e were picking it up throughout western ashington and into central regon.
hey sure were not going to miss this one.
other ature is going to win and you'll pay hell trying to predict it."
hus, when a new event occurs, like the continuous, 50-minute, low-frequency tremor on aturday, the scientists sometimes need to quickly revise their thoughts.
peaking at a news conference, ajor said the eruption appeared to have punched a hole about 100 feet in diameter in the glacial ice that covers part of the mountain's horseshoe-shaped dome.
"f you shake it a whole lot and pop it open, you're going to get a lot of frothing and it's going to be an explosive event.
 tremor _ a steady vibration _ "indicates movement of gases or fluid within the volcano," teele said, while individual earthquakes indicate "a pounding and breaking of rock."
'm still hoping 'll see something."
o injuries or damage to property were reported.
n area of two-to-four hectares (five to 10 acres) on the lava cap rose and fractured during the eruption, releasing glacial water and the column of steam, ajor said.
elting of the glacier could trigger debris flows down onto the barren pumice plain at the foot of the mountain, the  said, noting a "very low probability" that downstream communities would be affected.
n comparison, riday's eruption was a ``hiccup,''  geologist om ierson told reporters.
ust before noon on riday, seismometers at the ascades olcano bservatory in ancouver, ash., wiggled in a familiar pattern.
he explosions shaved off 400 meters (1,300 feet) of the mountain's top, reducing it from 2,950 meters (9,680 feet) to 2,549 meters (8,363 feet).
"he monitoring will definitely continue on a very intense scale until we can determine that the thing has really gone back to sleep," said om ierson, a  geologist.
he 1980 eruption reamed open the route to the surface, and for six years smaller eruptions piled lava into the massive dome that marks the main conduit for magma.
he steam cloud drifted southwest from the mountain peak in southern ashington state and aviation officials warned aircraft in the area to avoid the plume, ederal viation uthority officials told .
he ash could be accompanied by lava flow and possibly blow much farther northwest, depending on the weather, and cause health problems for anyone with asthma or other respiratory diseases, said r. homas ierson, a geologist with the geological survey.
fter the mountain's cataclysmic explosion in 1980, the volcano erupted more modestly an additional 21 times, each usually accompanied by a characteristic seismic signal.
ut lookout points farther away were not considered to be in danger.
he belch on riday might have instead been the denouement of some underground indigestion from six years ago.
hey went quickly to their cars and drove away, with some relocating several miles (kilometers) north to oldwater idge isitors enter, which officials said was safe.
he crew aboard a helicopter taking measurements on aturday reported the smell of rotten eggs, probably hydrogen sulfide emanating from magma.
he growing consensus among scientists is that new magma is probably entering the volcano's upper levels, possibly bringing with it volatile gases that could lead to eruptions, said ill teele at the niversity of ashington's seismic laboratory in eattle.
"he larger earthquakes have dropped off," amar said.
gain, the seismic activity died down, then picked up.
owns and cities throughout the acific orthwest were buried in gray ash.
esterday we had a very weak tremor signal."
ere in outle (pronounced -el), a town of 700 that is the closest to the mountain, many residents said that while they were not panicking, they were concerned about an eruption causing a mudflow into the three nearby rivers, which were flooded and full of floating debris in 1980.
" mean, last time, their worst-case scenario didn't even come close to what happened here.
astle ock residents, many of whom witnessed the 1980 explosion, which dumped truckloads of ash on this town, seemed to be taking the new development in stride and expressed little worry on aturday, saying nothing could compare to the 1980 event.
athquakes are rumbling at a rate of one or two per minute, it added.
"his one didn't involve anybody dying or any of that bad destruction, so we could feel good about enjoying it," ynn orret said.
ome tourists _ like the orrets _ smiled in giddy, guilt-free wonder at the mountain's power.
"f the seismicity in the area does not ease off, it's a sign that it's not over yet.
he flash snow melt on the mountain triggered floods and mudslides, sending streams and rivers over their banks and destroying infrastructure for hundreds of miles around.
he explosion killed 57 people, triggered the largest landslide in recorded history and blew 520 million tons of ash eastward across the nited tates.
he blast sent clouds of volcanic ash high into the atmosphere, where jet streams carried it as far as the  eastern seaboard 3,000 miles (4,800 km) away.
"t was like a big burp," said am orret, 49.
nstruments on or hovering above the surface offer only indirect suggestions of what is happening.
ike ergus, a spokesman with the ederal viation dministration in eattle, said the plume had reached 16,000 feet in altitude, but did not know whether any planes would need to be rerouted.
nd far from running away, people like enise orton, who lives 130 miles away in andy, re., are traveling hours to get here, bursting with anticipation for the eruption.
thers were disappointed: hey didn't head for the hills until they saw riday's eruption on television, and by the time they made it up there, the cloud had cleared.
"t's like waiting for a parade that's late," said orton, who opened a hot dog stand on the mountain, selling mostly to reporters who were among the dozens camped out at the lookout point.
fter letting off steam from its lava cap in a spectacular natural display, the rumblings stopped and the huge cloud quickly dispersed.
ntil then, scientists had not detected significant amounts of volcanic gases.
ir sampling had detected only tiny amounts of the volcanic gases that new magma produces, but scientists said the gases could be sealed inside the system or have been dissolved by water on the mountain.
undreds of people visited every day, watching seismic needles chart bouncing lines at the observatory and quietly urging the volcano to put on a show _ just not too big a show.
rom the pattern of seismic shakings before and after the 1980 eruption, seismologists laboriously constructed a fuzzy picture of the volcano's workings, the equivalent of a prenatal sonogram.
 am so disappointed," said lva hearn of uburn.
" missed it the first time back in the '80s eruption and  certainly wasn't going to this time," said welder ean trahm of old ar, who brought camping gear and a cooler and planned to stay all night.
" know it might sound like the strangest thing in the world," said aura odd, the owner of ady ug ntiques in downtown astle ock, who observed scores of tourists passing through town aturday on their way to or from the mountain.
o they donned their leather jackets, chaps and bandanas, hopped on their motorcycles, and began cruising up ighway 504 _ past a theater that that airs the 1980 footage every 45 minutes, past trinket shops hawking statues made of volcano bits, past a lodge that happily warned travelers: "atch your ash up there!"
"t's just a dynamic area," said cott inderman, a ranger.
he eruption was so short-lived that the ash appeared to pose no threat to anyone.
hrough the day on unday, the intensity of the earthquakes diminished somewhat.
olcanologists must sift through competing plausible explanations for what they observe and what they do not.
"hat's the sort of thing that frankly sends a chill up the back of a volcanologist," he said.
"vents like this were very common between 1981 and 1985, so this is not unusual or extraordinary by any means," r. on .
he volcanoes can lie dormant for centuries, then revive, sometimes catastrophically.
nformation like the volcano's internal temperatures and pressures can only be guessed at.