he federal ood and rug dministration says it has received hundreds of reports from physicians, health authorities and others about adverse reactions to ephedrine-based products.
``f companies that would have tested their products and sold them as drugs are now going to not test them and sell them as dietary supplements,'' he said, ``then we have lost information about the safety and efficacy of those products.''
hile the  can alert consumers to products that could be dangerous, the ietary upplement ealth and ducation ct of 1994 limits the agency's latitude in regulating supplements.
he agency also is looking at requiring product labels that instruct consumers not to use the product for more than seven days.
t can be found in more than 200 diet supplements, in pills and powders, drinks and diet bars, for sale in health food stores and on the nternet.
harmanex says the lovastatin occurs naturally and that holestin is more akin to a food than a drug.
``omehow there is the idea that if you use a plant directly or extract a tea it will be more effective and have less side effects (than approved drugs) and that's not true.''
everal states have banned ephedrine-containing supplements.
``f there is a biologically active component in the supplement, to say it is not a drug is illogical because it will have a similar effect,'' he said.
fter receiving more than 1,400 similar, ephedrine-related complaints from people across the state, the exas epartment of ealth is considering classifying the stimulant as a dangerous drug and requiring a prescription for most products containing it.
et, because herbal products are classified as dietary supplements, not drugs, and face none of the premarket hurdles drugs must clear, consumers have no assurance of safety or effectiveness.
hile over-the-counter drugs are subject to ood and rug dministration regulation, herbal supplements are assumed safe unless proved otherwise.
``phedra supplements are derived from plants that can contain any number of ephedrine-like alkaloids,'' he said.
holestin, he said, is sold to people who are too healthy for evacor, the erck drug.
anning ephedrine from over-the-counter sales would affect the multimillion-dollar, herbal-supplement industry in exas.
he formula, which manufacturers say is safe, has been linked to more than a dozen deaths nationwide.
lthough other states have restricted some sales of ephedrine products, exas' proposal is by far the most far-reaching, llis said.
t has also proposed a rule that would restrict, but not eliminate, the manufacturer's ability to use the herbal stimulant ephedra, which has been linked to more than a dozen deaths nationwide.
he ood and rug dministration originally had reported it was investigating more than 40 deaths possibly related to ephedrine, arber said.
t contains stimulants known chemically as ephedrine.
s with other substances classified as dietary supplements, the  can restrict the sale of an herbal product only if it receives well-documented reports of health problems associated with it.
:  know a lot of people who use the product ipped uel to boost energy.
hus, clashan can advertise that holestin ``promotes healthy cholesterol,'' but not that it ``prevents heart attack or stroke.''
``f this product and industry are going to have longevity, we have to come out say, `ou can't pop supplements like they are this is another form of medicine.'''
octors say there is growing evidence that substances like t. ohn's wort and ginkgo biloba may have dangerous interactions with the variety of drugs used to anesthetize patients during surgery.
``onsumers are looking for a name they trust and, to be honest, that's why we went with entrum,'' he said.
s for the purity of etabolife, he said: ``e believe we are responsible.
he company contends that the product is a natural alternative for people who are too healthy to take the drug.
ven when a label says the product has been standardized, the consumer has no way to know if it actually meets that standard.''
t least eight deaths in exas and more than 40 nationwide have been linked to ephedrine _ a stimulant found in certain sian plants _ said ynthia ulmo of the state health department.
eight loss, muscle building, and energy boosting products containing ephedrine have not been recalled by the , although the agency issued several warnings after it investigated more than 800 adverse health events including heart attack, stroke, seizure, and more than 30 deaths associated with products containing ephedrine.
he case is being watched as a pivotal battle between the , which is chafing against a 1994 law that left it almost powerless to regulate vitamins and herbal products, and the dietary supplement industry, which has been growing wildly since the law was passed.
hey spent more than $6.5 billion in 1996 on over-the counter dietary supplements, according to the  ood and rug dministration's latest figures.
or evitsky, who is studying the effects of several herbal supplements, memory-aiding products and mood supplements seem to show the most promise.
hat complaint is at the heart of a battle between the  and harmanex nc., which manufactures a product called holestin, which it sells as an supplement in al-art and other big chains.
f any meet the agency's criteria for safety and effectiveness and are eventually approved as drugs, they would be allowed to carry direct health claims _ instead of just structure and function statements _ on labels and in advertising.
nd, more importantly, are they safe?
nlike drugs that get  approval before they are marketed, dietary supplements must be proven unsafe before regulators can restrict the use of a product.
anning over-the-counter sales of ephedrine would only hurt consumers and independent business distributors, while allowing larger drug companies to profit, said hillip indler of the allas-based ellness nternational etwork, which sells dietary supplements, including the stimulant.
ost who testified were connected to the industry that provides ephedrine-based dietary supplements or stimulants.
``he lack of quality standards is the o.
t issue is not whether holestin is no one argues that it is.
roducts containing ephedrine _ commonly labeled as ephedra, ma huang hinese ephedra, and epitonin _ are often found in weight-loss, energy boosting, and body building supplements.
he company that markets ipped uel, winlaboratories nc. in ew ork, has said it does not believe its product was responsible.
clashan calls holestin a dietary supplement.
ndeed, scores of products sold in the nited tates are listed by uropean and merican authorities as ineffective, unsafe or both, and manufacturing standards to assure high quality have been proposed but are not yet in force.
nd, in some cases, little is done to assure quality control.
o you have any information, and where can  order products?
``eople with specific illnesses look at these products a different way than the healthy person,'' he added, ``and it is through their eyes that the marketplace must be judged.''
f you think what you're doing (with supplements) is helping, then you will stick with it,'' believing the supplements helped, he added.
efore the passage in 1994 of the ietary upplement ealth and ducation ct, manufacturers were prohibited, for instance, from making claims about the potential benefits of their products.
till, the combined effects of the herbal potpourri found in many diet supplements have not been studied.
nstead, he received a visit from  investigators in pril of last the agency had received complaints that holestin contained lovastatin, both from a pharmacist and from erck o, the pharmaceutical company that manufactures evacor, the cholestorol-lowering drug that contains the same ingredient as holestin.
ften, little is known about the substances, their effects and their interactions with other drugs.
owers supports the move to ban such products from over-the-counter sales.
he  currently is considering prohibiting the marketing of dietary supplements containing 8 milligrams or more of ephedrine per dose.
owever, when used in uncontrolled dosages or by people with certain underlying health problems, it can cause a dangerous rise in blood pressure and, in its herbal form, has been responsible for serious adverse reactions and dozens of deaths, mainly among people who inappropriately used it as a stimulant or diet aid.
 year ago, the resident's ommission on ietary upplement abels recommended that the  appoint a committee to evaluate the safety and effectiveness of herbal products.
ut the revised guidelines allow companies to advertise the health effects of herbal supplements _ without having to conclusively prove their effectiveness _ so long as the wording does not suggest that the products prevent, treat or cure disease.
lthough such a standard would say nothing about an herb's safety or effectiveness, it would result in reliable methods that the industry would have to use to assure the identity and quality of its products.
owers bought the ephedrine-based product, ipped uel, at a health food store in an ntonio.
: ohnson is married, but not to any of the women _ there have been four, not three _ with whom he has co-hosted ``ometime.''
: ou probably heard about concerns expressed by the ood and rug dministration relating to scores of herbal products and supplements.
ut do these supplements actually work?
fficials at the ood and rug dministration call it something else: an illegal, unapproved drug.
he report included a comment from lackburn, who, when discussing the safety of ephedrine-containing products such as etabolife, said ``you can die'' from taking them.
he  wants to ban the substance, maintaining that it is an unapproved drug because it contains a natural form of a key chemical in the cholesterol-lowering prescription drug evacor, made by erck o.
hat's a drug when it's in a pill form, and it's a food when it's in coffee.
octors emphasize that much study needs to be done to establish whether there is a real risk for patients taking herbal remedies.
ore than 60 companies in the exas market ephedrine-based products, which constitute a multimillion industry in the state, according to ichael llis, president of etabolife nternational.
ore than four dozen botanicals or botanical formulations have been submitted to the agency as investigational new drugs.
``t's marketing, there's no miracle.
hile the majority of supplements are not dangerous, consumers shouldn't buy or use products just because the label says ``natural,'' according to r. avid evitsky a nutrition and psychology professor at ornell niversity.
phedra's active ingredient, ephedrine, has been in over-the-counter cold and asthma medications since the 1920s, and the ephedra plant has been used for thousands of years in hinese medicine.
hile the  forbids labels that ``state or imply that the product can help diagnose, treat, cure, or prevent a disease (for example, `cures cancer' or `treats arthritis')'' consumers should be wary of products that are marketed as ``miracle cures,'' ``wonder drugs,'' and ``new breakthroughs,'' according to the agency's website.
he culprit named in ipped uel is ephedra, also called ma huang, epitonin and sida cordifolia.
ince the law was passed, the  has received about 2,300 notifications from manufacturers intending to make claims about their products, and has objected to about 150 of them.
he danger, he said, is that some people with potentially life-threatening illnesses will use the products in place of standard medical treatments.
hat same caffeine is sold over the counter as o-oz.
he big-name herbal pill dispensers now entering the market say they are sticking to more ``mainstream'' substances and argue that those formulas are safe and effective when taken by healthy people in recommended doses.
wo of the most common herbals are t. ohn's wort, which is said to help with mild depression, and ginkgo, which is taken to improve memory and blood circulation.
wo years ago, in response to reports of adverse reactions, the ood and rug dministration proposed restricting doses of ephedra to 8 milligrams at a time and 24 milligrams a day, and prohibiting the addition of caffeine to ephedrine products.
``he  needs to provide stronger evidence on the relationship between the intake of dietary supplements containing ephedrine alkaloids and the occurrence of adverse reactions,'' the report said.
``or the first time,'' he said, ``we can educate the merican consumer about what the product does.
ut some in the dietary supplement industry are at odds with the government's descriptions that some supplements _ particularly those containing ephedrine _ are dangerous.
ritics also worry that pharmaceutical companies will attempt to classify some products as herbal supplements instead of as drugs to skirt the rigorous process required to bring a drug to market.
ore recently, the ew ork tate ociety of nesthesiologists issued a similar warning.
nder the 1994 law, consumers have no assurance that an herbal product contains what the label says it does or that it is free from harmful contaminants.
nd even if an herbal product has been reliably made in some standard dose, it does not mean that scientific studies have shown it to be effective.
hereas standard testing of a drug for approval by the  can cost as much as $500 million per product _ a prohibitive amount for companies to spend on botanicals that cannot be patented _ tests to establish ``reasonable certainty'' would cost only $1 million to $2 million, yler estimated.
etabolife's president ichael . llis has also threatened to sue the ashington ost over a similar report and has battled successfully in states, such as exas, to stop legislatures from requiring prescriptions for weight-loss products containing ephedrine.
``e know ong u has been used for centuries, but we don't know why it lowers cholesterol,'' hang said.
n recent years, the  has issued warnings about the danger of over-the-counter supplements containing ephedrine, a powerful heart stimulant, and gamma butryolactone, or , a central nervous system depressant.
ow is he or she to know what is best, what products are reliable and safe?
he patients later said they had been taking ephedra.
n some cases, eeld said, doctors have been surprised to see the blood pressure shoot back up to dangerous levels that could cause a stroke or heart attack.
everal months ago, the  reported having 900 reports of side effects, including heart palpitations and psychosis, heart attacks and strokes.
owever, thousands of studies of botanicals have been completed abroad _ mainly in ermany _ that strongly suggest a health-promoting role for more than 200 plant products.
f the products were safe, companies could say what they wished, so long as they did not claim their products could prevent, treat or cure disease.
e says about half of his customers use drinks, pills, or meal supplements to boost performance and build muscle.
``f you promote a product as ood ender, you have a responsibility to that person who is depressed, and if that product doesn't work, you are doing harm.''
side from the turf battle between the supplement industry and regulators, the dispute raises crucial questions: hat is the distinction between these herbal products, which may contain naturally occurring chemicals as potent as those in any drug, and drugs themselves?
here weight-loss is concerned, ``the more you believe in them the more they work...there is something to the placebo effect,'' evitsky said.
mericans spend about $5 billion a year on herbal products, which, unlike prescription drugs, are not fully regulated by the federal government.
``f you drink coffee in the morning, why are you drinking coffee?
``he way they are positioned in the marketplace can lead people down roads to ineffective treatments,'' essler said, pointing to products whose names, he argued, could cause consumers to think they could be used instead of prescription drugs.
``o say you can determine a safe amount (for over-the-counter sale) is incorrect,'' ulmo said.
ndeed, after the act was adopted, annual sales of dietary supplements in the nited tates skyrocketed, jumping from more than $8 billion in 1994 to nearly $12 billion last year, according to the utrition usiness ournal, a trade publication.
dding to the confusion is that botanical makers are allowed to describe products only in terms of their effects on the structure or function of the body, not their potential health benefits.
`` drug is a drug whether it's from a natural source or you make it in laboratory.''
ith  authority limited by the 1994 law, the ederal rade ommission, which monitors advertising, has taken a more active role in monitoring supplement makers.
hey point out that its active ingredient, ephedrine, is a central nervous system stimulant similar to amphetamine, and they say reactions to it can vary widely.
ut with the passage of the 1994 ietary upplement ealth and ducation ct, the law under which the holestin case will be decided, the agency's task grew even more vexing.
ikewise, although the law does allow health warnings on the label, most manufacturers have yet to include them.
e don't tell anyone to take them but we sell them if they want them.''
ark lumenthal, who heads the merican otanical ouncil, noted that the herb t. ohn's wort, widely used in ermany and increasingly in the nited tates to counter mild depression, is standardized for a substance called hypericin.
erbal supplements are regulated by a looser set of standards.
ather, the  contends that holestin has crossed the increasingly murky boundary that separates dietary supplements from drugs, because it contains an ingredient, lovastatin, that is the key component of a cholesterol-lowering drug.
he ew ork group urged patients who could not go off the drugs in time to bring in the medication in its original container and show it to the doctor.
lthough hard scientific evidence of a problem is lacking, they say, anecdotal reports from hospitals suggest that herbal remedies may be putting some surgery patients at serious risk.
he witnesses pleaded with the state to back down from the proposal and instead consider a compromise that, among other things, would restrict sales of ephedrine-based products to minors.
arketed as neither a food nor a drug, herbal products are not obliged to meet any established standards of effectiveness or safety for medicinal products, which require extensive laboratory and clinical trials before approval.
he herb is called ephedra, or ma huang, and it comes from a shrublike plant grown widely in sia.
ut to its critics, ephedra is a potentially dangerous substance that urgently needs more study and regulation.
he incomplete study, paid for by companies that market ephedrine products, has found no adverse effects so far on patients, aly said.
``ome companies actually changed their formulas so we would keep their products on the shelf,'' she said, while others ``took out the ma huang and added another herb very high in caffeine called guarnana and they advertise it as `ephedra free,''' unz said.
he agency took four years, and more than 100 reports of life-threatening symptoms and 38 deaths, to act against ephedra, often sold as the hinese herb ma huang, a stimulant that can prove disastrous to people with heart problems.
he death about two months ago of a 15-year-old alifornia girl who was taking an ephedrine-based stimulant also has highlighted the ongoing debate over the safety of such products.
n some cases, critics say, the supplements can be quite dangerous indeed.
(he merican erbal roducts ssociation, a trade organization that sets standards and guidelines for the diet supplement industry, recommends that dosages not exceed 25 milligrams, or 100 a a etabolife pill has 12 milligrams, according to the label.)
merican physicians have completed and published only a few well-designed studies of some popular botanicals.
ome products contained significantly less of the active ingredients than listed on the label, some significantly more.
rom time to time, eeld said, patients in surgery suddenly show signs of a drop in blood pressure.
one of our stores carry ephedra products or ma uang _ `speed' _ as we like to call it,'' said llyn unz nutrition coordinator for read and ircus's northeast region.
``ou see more and more dietary supplements sold right next to over-the-counter drugs,'' said illiam chultz, the 's deputy commissioner for policy.
ll botanicals must display a disclaimer on the label following the description of the product's structural or functional role: ``his statement has not been evaluated by the ood and rug dministration.
``eople are looking for that quick fix.
he warning label on hermadrene (and many other brands, including etabolife) makes clear that ephedrine-based products should not be taken by people with certain medical conditions, including high blood pressure.
``f there is an easier way, people want it,'' osentino said.
ou're looking for the caffeine, a stimulant.
hey have said that the pills, tonics and teas are sold with little information for consumers to judge whether they actually work or might have potential side effects.
he outcome of the case could affect the medicine and kitchen cabinets of millions of merican consumers, including many doctors and scientists, who have come to believe that herbs like ginkgo, echinacea and t. ohn's wort are as important to good health as aspirin and antibiotics.
``verything is natural,'' evitsky said.
essler waged a vigorous but unsuccessful battle against the law that virtually stripped his former agency of its authority to regulate herbal and other dietary supplements.
hile the law was a disaster for regulators, it was a windfall for businesses that sell herbs and vitamins.
ust products like holestin be subjected to the rigorous testing that drugs undergo?
he ffice of ietary upplements at the ational nstitutes of ealth is helping to finance a three-year multicenter study of t. ohn's wort as a treatment for clinical depression and a study of plant-based estrogens as a preventive for postmenopausal health problems.
etabolife nternational nc., a 5-year-old an iego company that sells an ephedra-based pill called etabolife 356, says this year's sales will reach $900 million.
he very act of ongress that has fostered this growth _ the 1994 ietary upplement ealth and ducation ct _ has also permitted chaos to reign in the botanical marketplace, with no mechanism to assure that products are safe or effective.
n 1997, the  advised consumers to restrict their intake of ephedrine (derived from the ephedra plant) to 8 mg per dose and no more than 24 mg per day and not to use the product for more than seven days.
s evidence ephedrine is safe, llis cited an ongoing study by r. atricia aly of the arvard edical chool on the effects of a supplement containing caffeine and ephedra, an herb from which ephedrine is extracted.
ndeed, one quarter of prescription drugs and hundreds of over-the-counter products were originally isolated from plants.
n addition, a few medical and pharmacology schools have recently introduced courses in phytomedicine, the study of botanicals.
``his shocked us,'' he said, stressing that there is no medical evidence that ephedrine products cause adverse effects.
he volume, to be issued annually, updates the ommission  reports and adds several hundred other products sold in the nited tates, listing effects, side effects and conditions in which their use is inadvisable.
``here is a risk that the line will blur.''
ut these actions, says former ood and rugs ommissioner avid essler, are hardly enough to make a dent in the rampant proliferation of herbal remedies that he says are ineffective at best and unsafe at worst.
or healthy people, most of the products pose little or no risk, and some, containing garlic and ginseng, may even be helpful, essler said.
n ay, etabolife nternational nc., sued - hannel 5, its anchor usan ornick, and r. eorge . lackburn of arvard edical chool after the oston station reported on health risks related to the use of ephedrine-containing weight-loss dietary supplements, including the top-selling etabolife 356, which the an iego-based company makes.
s the plants become scarcer and more expensive, products containing them are increasingly likely to be adulterated and may even contain none of the herb listed on the label.
ow any substance that can be found in foods, regardless of amount or action and including substances that act as hormones or toxins, can be produced and sold without any premarket testing or agency approval.
read and ircus hole oods arkets, a small assachusetts chain, stopped selling about 12 products containing ephedra around the time the  warned in 1996 that the product was an ``amphetamine-like stimulant'' that can damage the heart and nervous system.
e don't have to rely on a person in a health food store to explain it.''
undreds of products formulated with virtually no government oversight are crowding shelves of health food stores, food markets and pharmacies nationwide.
sn't it restricted to students of the nited tates and its territories?
n testing 19 ephedrine-based supplements, urley said, he found wide variations in alkaloid content.
`` would whole-heartedly support that,'' arvey said.
`` took the ipped uel with me, and before  even opened it up, the nurse guessed what it was,'' he said.
phedrine has been widely studied over the past few years, and studies suggest that it can produce a wide array of possible side effects, including anxiety, insomnia, hypertension, tachycardia, psychosis, kidney damage, dependency, heart attack, stroke and death.
1 problem in the whole industry,'' said r. arro yler, emeritus professor of pharmacognosy (the study of active ingredients in plants) at urdue niversity.
nfluenced by worsening international drug crimes, hina is now confronted with an unprecedented situation: 520,000 drug users across the country had been registered with government medical institutions by the end of 1995.
ome of its products include diet aids, athletic performance-boosters and many ``herbal ecstasy'' intoxicants that teen-agers buy at convenience stores to get an amphetamine-like ``buzz'' or ``high.''
``ure, 'll admit that part of it's because of my own ignorance for trusting some 18-year-old who recommended the stuff at the health food store,'' he said.
ow, even major pharmaceutical companies like arner ambert, merican ome roducts, ayer and mithline eecham are introducing herbal products, adding respectability to this marginalized market.
  hina's customs officials have scored remarkable success in drug seizures in 1997, today's nternational usiness aily reported.
o longer in the broadcast booth, he now evaluates umpires for the ational eague.
 had assumed that with changing technology and lifestyles, it was long gone.
epartments concerned must avoid wranglings over duties and responsibilities and coordinate with each other, it was urged.
any turned to herbs as a gentler way to treat health problems and a potential tool for preserving mental and physical health.
, exas _ eeking to boost his daily workouts at the gym, eff owers turned recently to a popular herbal supplement to increase his metabolism.
ince the chulze family couldn't consume all the rice they produced, they have, over the years, given generous amounts to patients and friends.
o furious has the growth been that one analyst, atthew atsky of the oston-based investment banking firm of dams, arkness ill, said some of the nation's biggest pharmaceutical companies are now planning to introduce their own lines of herbal products.
he seeds of the modern herbal market were sown in the '60s when ``green, organic and natural became buzzwords,'' yler said.
, tah _ ere in the heart of the nation's herbal and vitamin industry, a stainless steel contraption was hard at work on a recent morning, spitting out clear plastic capsules at the rate of 90,000 an hour.
et with a decent body of research behind holestin, he said, he at one time envisioned himself becoming the 's poster boy for good behavior.
n fact, analysts estimate that the entrum line alone has the potential to generate $80 million in revenues within a year of its introduction, a figure riedman calls ``on the low side.''
leven years ago, llis, a former police officer, was arrested in an iego and charged with using ephedrine to produce methamphetamine, a highly addictive street drug.
ena had sung the same music when she and ennedy married at ewport, .., on ept. 12, 1953.
he only previous winner from beyond the mainland nited tates was ugh osteson of uerto ico, who won in 1975.
ut let's keep this in perspective.''
llis is at the center of the latest ephedra-related controversy.
nother vital participant at both ceremonies was ardinal ichard ushing of oston.
`` read about the ong sland woman's death, and it's tragic,'' he said.
ommercial spots ran on 1,500 radio stations, and a number of full-page newspaper advertisements.
hen, five years ago, illiam clashan r., a young alifornia venture capitalist, learned that scientists in eijing were studying the rice for another reason: it seemed to lower cholesterol.
he caption said he was a veteran of esert torm.
tanding outside the low-pressure room where the encapsulating machine was spinning, a lab coat covering his royal blue shirt and ermes tie, he looked a little wistful.
he growing herbal industry has raised no objection to the doctors' warning.
ach contained precisely 600 milligrams of a fine, brick-colored powder that federal health officials are trying to ban.
e have a report from a -approved lab that shows you can't make methampethamine out of etabolife.
``his case points out why we need consistency in the warning labels.
ith millions of people taking ephedrine each year, llis argued, a few cases of adverse effects are to be expected.
owever, r. ichard . riedman, director of psychopharmacology at ew ork ospital-ornell edical enter, contends the current distinction between dietary supplements and drugs is based on semantics, not biology, and that both should be carefully regulated.
erck, he contends, is making a power grab for that market by trying to push holestin off the shelves _ a charge denied by an einer, a spokeswoman for the pharmaceutical company.
ompanies like harmanex, he added, ``want to be able to implant the idea in the public that the drug is medically beneficial'' without doing rigorous research drug companies must do to obtain approval.
ne situation that some doctors suspect might be happening in operating rooms involves ephedra, which, despite being banned by the federal ood and rug dministration, is still being taken in other forms.
he possible interactions include an unintended deepening of the effects of some anesthetics and problems with blood pressure and bleeding.
``he only amount we see as safe is zero.''
he company introduced holestin at the end of 1996, after nearly three years of study.
ut some local authorities have not fully recognized the seriousness of the problem, and have not done enough to crack down on drug-related crime, the  said.
he 1994 law, clashan said, made it worth investing in science.
he only restriction stated is that generals and support/administrative personnel usually are ineligible to receive it.
owever, the agency responded that it lacked the budget to support such an effort.
ut not everyone sees the trend as a healthy one for consumers.
s. apati, who suffered from high blood pressure, had been taking hermadrene, an ephedra supplement manufactured by portharma of oncord, alif.
hat kind of science, clashan admits, would cost far too much for a small company like his.
clashan says he had a vision for his he wanted to apply ``pharmaceutical rigors'' to the dietary supplement industry, using research to persuade consumers that astern therapies worked.
ndependent analyses of some products, particularly those containing costly or scarce herbs, revealed that some have little or none of the purported active ingredient listed on the label.
ut, he explained, ``hypericin is not directly linked to its antidepressant activity.''
hey vow to help you trim down, boost energy, put muscle on, and even take cellulite off.
o to any health food store, fitness center, or grocery store and you'll see shelves stocked with energy enhancement and sports performance pills, drinks, and bars.
n an interview, ichael llis, the chief executive of etabolife and a board member of the merican erbal roducts ssociation, strongly defended ephedrine-based supplements.
his product is not intended to diagnose, treat, cure or prevent any disease.''
osanna orras reportedly took ipped uel capsules before collapsing at soccer practice.
he athletic club does not sell creatine or any other supplements, but does have protein powders and sports bars.
he agency has issued a notice of proposed rules but no final ruling as yet.
arketers promise that the pills provide an amphetaminelike rush, aid in weight loss and even increase sexual sensation, but medical experts say they can cause heart attacks, strokes and seizures.
hile a company cannot claim an herbal supplement cures cancer or relieves depression, for example, it can say that it ``promotes prostate health'' or ``aids in mental focus.''
eber dismisses the contention that red yeast rice is a instead he calls it ``a functional food.''
: ome time ago,  heard about a doctor who grows arolina old rice, donating the crop to a church to sell.
nce it is sold out, the next crop will be available for shipping next ecember, the spokeswoman said.
e officiated at the wedding and sang the requiem mass at the funeral.
he combination of chemicals in botanicals is potentially both a plus and a minus.
nowing that inatra was an admirer of resident ohn . ennedy,  wonder if inatra sang ``ve aria'' at ennedy's funeral?
hat is the edge in bringing these new people into the fold.''
onsumers are warned, however, that federal drug safety officials are not watching the store.
nd nutrition groups say that sales are rising each year.
nd nobody, he said, is trying to ban mushrooms.
hat has always been a risk, but the marketing giants now pushing into the industry can pitch these formulas to more consumers, he said.
hat gives companies much greater range in making product claims than manufacturers of, say, mouthwash.
``f you reduce caloric intake you are going to lose weight, no question.
ecause plants contain a mixture of relatively diluted chemicals, they naturally tend to have milder actions, both in their therapeutic benefits and side effects, than the concentrated, single chemicals in most drugs.
espite volumes of testimonials from users, many who have been paid to make them, fitness, energy, and weight-loss supplements don't appear to produce a measurable effect, he said.
he same cholesterol-lowering ingredient in lovastatin, he notes, occurs in even higher concentrations in oyster mushrooms, commonly used in sian cooking.
llis and r. ed arber, a toxicologist for the dietary supplement industry, disputed the number of complaints and deaths ulmo said were possibly linked to ephedrine products.
mong them were studies showing that saw palmetto can shrink an enlarged prostate and ginkgo biloba can improve memory in patients with early lzheimer's disease.
o which yler commented, ``f that is true, why on earth would anyone use it?''
``'m not against them,'' lark says, but ``there is not a magic pill.
lthough all erman physicians must take courses on herbal remedies, only a handful of merican medical and pharmacology schools offer courses in this field.
n une 1996, r. obert emple, director of medical policy for the 's enter for rug valuation, suggested that, rather than subjecting botanicals to the extensive tests required for drugs, the agency might consider applying less stringent criteria to assess an herb's effects, at least when a product is to be used only for a short time.
till, the current regulations have created a quagmire of consumer confusion and set up potential health crises that even industry officials say could ultimately hurt producers as well as users of herbal products.
eanwhile, r. oerg ruenwald, medical director of a erman phytomedicine company and primary editor of the new hysicians' esk eference for erbal edicines, said professionals can rely on that volume for current, documented information about botanicals.
he , for example, is attempting to rein in the use of the herbal stimulant ephedra, which is sold by various companies in a formula under different names.
clashan contends that, at its root, the dispute is an economic one.
oday, clashan's company, harmanex, sells the encapsulated red powder under the trade name holestin in 37,000 merican stores, from health food outlets to the giant al-art chain.
ut recently, the federal agency revised that number to only two, he said.
ore than 150 people testified at the hearing, with an overwhelming majority against requiring prescription sales of ephedrine.
ales of non-prescription ephedrine products sold for asthma, such as rimatene and some nasal decongestants, would not fall under the proposed new regulations, officials said.
hen two or more chemicals enhance one another's activity, the therapeutic benefit could theoretically exceed that of an isolated substance formulated as a drug.
larmed by what they see as the potential for mishaps with patients taking herbal remedies for everything from depression to memory loss, anesthesiologists have begun urging people to stop taking the herbs and supplements before having surgery.
he society recently issued a warning to consumers using herbal medicine to stop taking the products at least two to three weeks before any scheduled surgery.
``harmacists know it, doctors know it and consumers know it.
e has urged the  to appoint a working group of scientists, consumers, herbalists and industry representatives to develop new guidelines for dietary supplements containing ephedra and other herbs.
``e spend tens of millions of dollars putting together manufacturing and quality-control processes,'' said lliot riedman, chairman and chief executive of harmaprint nc., which is producing the supplements that merican ome roducts is planning to market under the entrum name.
or se y lients of the ew ork imes ews ervice
 thought the badge was given only to those who had been in combat for at least three months, or had been awarded a urple eart.
lackburn's attorney effrey . artin called etabolife's lawsuit ``frivolous'' and said ``we are doing our best to get it dismissed.''
n recent months, ephedrine-based products have figured prominently in two widely publicized cases, both involving deaths.
ast month, the ational nstitutes of ealth began listing on the nternet international bibliographic information on dietary supplements, including herbal products.
urley has just completed a study suggesting wide variations in product ingredients and quality.
hile the court case is pending, clashan said, sales of holestin are booming.
: ver the past few years, ean ohnson, host of ``ometime'' on public television, has had three women who have helped him build, and all seemed to be his wives.
hen on ay 20, the  notified clashan that it considered holestin illegal, a move that prompted the company to ask for a hearing before imball of the .. istrict ourt in alt ake ity.
he campaign was outlined at a national anti-drug conference late last month, and announced today by the ational ommittee of arcotics ontrol ().
chulze and his wife switched to arolina old, the original variety grown in the state's ld outh heyday, after discovering a source for the seed in exas.
ow he donates it _ for the same fund-raising purpose _ to the piscopal hurch of the oly rinity in idgeland, ..
: he competition, sponsored by cripps oward ewspapers, has only these restrictions: contestants must speak nglish and be younger than 16, and cannot have passed beyond the eighth grade at the time of their school finals.
he church still has a small supply of the arolina old from last ecember's harvest, a spokeswoman said hursday.
overnment and other experts have warned that a number of such products can be risky.
:  saw that ony ennett sang ``ve aria'' at rank inatra's funeral.
: t was uigi ena who sang ounod's ``ve aria'' at ennedy's funeral service ov. 25 at ashington's t. atthew's oman atholic athedral.
ushed heavily by epublican en. rrin atch of tah, the home base of many supplement makers, and passed over the objections of the , the law created a new product class, the dietary supplement, that was not subject to regulations applied to drugs.
``ut these companies are duping people because they stand to make a lot of money, while this stuff is killing people.''
acqueline ennedy had specifically requested him to do so.
onsumer confidence in herbal medicine is bolstered by the common but erroneous assumption that ``natural'' equals ``safe'' and the public's failure to realize that many plants contain chemicals that are potent drugs or outright poisons.
``hese alkaloids vary not only in pharmacological activity and potency, but certain combinations may be additive or synergistieir effect.''
``ust walk into your it's out of control,'' said essler, who waged a bitter, unsuccessful battle against the 1994 law as commissioner.
hey have seized 369 kilograms of all kinds of drugs during the year, 1.3 times the 1996 figure, the report said.
eggy revoort, president of ast arth erb nc., a company in ugene, re., that produces botanicals, said the demand for t. ohn's wort, used for mild depression, and kava, a calmative said to reduce anxiety, now exceeds their supply, introducing the ``danger of adulteration'' by ``unscrupulous dealers.''
he anesthesiologist will then administer a drug like ephedrine, to bring the pressure back up.
xperts say many patients withhold information about herbal drug use because they fear being ridiculed by their doctors.
``ome people die from eating peanut butter or strawberries,'' he said.
aking a supplement is ``easier to swallow than hearing that you'll have to go to the gym a lot and watch what you put in your mouth.''
e said, `` long history of safe use might provide sufficient safety information for products that are intended for short-term use.''
n thousands of postings on the nternet, users praise it for raising their energy, helping them lose weight and sharpening their muscle tone.
ome herbs _ like echinacea, goldenseal, merican ginseng and wild yam _ have become so popular that their continued supply from natural sources is in danger.
omplicating the safety issue is the fact, shown in several recent surveys, that most patients fail to tell their physicians they use herbal supplements and thus sometimes risk dangerous drug interactions or endure costly tests or treatments when an herb causes an unrecognized side effect.
he agency requires those goods to carry general cautionary labeling and dosage information, and it imposes limits on the claims that can be made in marketing.
``fficacy is now defined as what sells off the shelves.
phedra, for example, contains a natural stimulant that is approved for use as a decongestant and bronchial dilator in some pharmaceutical products.
hang scoured hinese research for promising herbal products and identified together, he and clashan narrowed the list to 30.
hus, botanicals generally take longer to act than regular pharmaceuticals and few have the potency of a prescription, the one possible exception being saw palmetto, which a well-designed study indicated may be as helpful for an enlarged prostate as the more expensive and riskier drug, roscar.
n early 1994, he r. ichael hang, a medical chemist and former pharmaceutical industry researcher who had set up a manufacturing plant to produce herbal medicines in uzhou, hina, near hanghai.
he study, financed by harmanex, compared the cholesterol levels of 42 adults who took 2.5 grams of holestin every day for three months with the levels in 41 adults who were given placebos.
esides, they say, unlike the little-known manufacturers that once dominated the industry, they have the research and development budgets and purchasing clout to insure product quality.
eanne pellman, a registered dietician at the oston thletic lub, said that creatine, a popular strength-increasing supplement, seems to ``have some promise,'' but she tries to steer (her clients) away from most supplements.
t the same time, two major new publications _ a 1,244-page hysicians' esk eference for erbal edicines, produced by the same company that publishes the hysicians' esk eference, and an nglish-language edition of ermany's therapeutic guide to herbal medicines, he omplete erman ommission  onographs _ have been issued to help educate physicians, pharmacists and interested consumers about the known uses, proper dosages and safety concerns of more than 600 botanicals now sold in this country.
ourt-appointed psychiatrists testified that s. ampagna had been in a state of psychosis, a reaction to the ephedrine-based supplement endrine, which she had taken for five days.
ore importantly, the  said, criminals involved in drug-related activities must be dealt with strictly in accordance with law, and fines should never be levied in place of harsher punishment.
ver the years after that, ample held jobs announcing for , the alifornia ngels and the ew ork ankees.
ccording to the , the hinese authorities have attached great importance to the drug problem since it re-emerged in the country in the early 1980s, and have launched a series of offensives against drug-related crimes.
mong the serious side effects that have been linked to herbal remedies are high blood pressure, life-threatening allergic reactions, heart rhythm abnormalities, mania, kidney failure and liver damage.
ustomers can buy drinks, pills or meal supplements at old's ym, according to arco osentino, owner of four oston area old's yms.
hus, a product label might say ``promotes cardiac function'' but it cannot say ``lowers cholesterol.''
merican ome roducts declined to provide an executive to discuss its supplements business beyond issuing a statement through a public relations representative saying, ``erbals represent a large and growing market with increasing consumer acceptance.''
lso, the commission late last year issued its first set of advertising guidelines aimed specifically at the supplement industry.
ermany's ommission  evaluated 380 botanicals, approving 254 as safe and reasonably effective and disapproving 126 as ineffective, unsafe or both.
n anuary, muscle and performance boosting products containing  had to be pulled from gym and store shelves after the  banned the product when some consumers experienced vomiting, slowed heart rate, seizures, comas, and even death.
he companies were selling remedies or purported cure-alls for ailments like impotence, cancer and obesity.
 ews says it expects to broadcast the interview later this month.
qually possible, though, when using an herb with two or more active chemicals, is that one will cancel the benefits of another or introduce a hazard.
lthough distributors nationwide still may call on customers occasionally, the legendary ``brush man'' calling door-to-door is little more than a memory, said company spokesman arry ray.
he epartment of ealth is not expected to rule on the possible changes until this fall.
 critic, r. acqueline erning, a professor of nutrition at the niversity of olorado, whose clients include many professional athletes, says the use of ephedrine-based products is ``rampant among athletes,'' even though they have been banned by the ational ollegiate thletic ssociation and the .. lympic ommittee.
he evaluations in both books are based on studies, most done in ermany and reviewed by teams of experts.
y early 1995, harmanex was born, with headquarters in imi alley, alif. ed yeast rice, called ong u, was one of the most promising projects on its list.
: he uller rush o. is still a booming business.
r. hillip . arvey, director of science and quality assurance at the ational utritional oods ssociation, whose 4,000 members make and sell herbal remedies, called the caution common sense.
he powder, a pulverized strain of rice called red yeast, is imported from hina, where it has been consumed for 2,000 years, both as an herbal remedy (it was thought to improve blood flow) and a food (it spices up tofu and makes a tasty marinade for duck and pork.)
he program makes it appear as though ohnson and his co-hosts are married ``so we can introduce situations that might realistically occur with a husband-wife team,'' as the program's publicity material states.
onne iebeler, the second co-host, stayed with ``ometime'' for four seasons, after which she moved to the est oast to pursue other acting opportunities.
eggy napp, the first co-host, started in 1986, but left after the first season.
urrent co-host obin artl joined ``ometime'' in uly 1992.
: ou're referring to outh arolina ophthalmologist ichard . chulze who, in an attempt to attract ducks, planted his first rice seeds in 1979 on his 400-acre urnbridge lantation on the outh arolina side of the avannah iver.
ven so, they still had a surplus, so chulze first donated it to the avannah ssociation for the lind to sell as a fund-raiser.
ou can order it by sending a check to hurch of the oly rinity, t.
n light of ody-nne's victory and the foreign participants this year, cripps oward officials said they would consider renaming the 71-year-old contest, substituting the world international for national.
ll have qualified by competing in previous spelling bees sponsored by their local newspapers.
he fine red powder being packed into the capsules, he said, was the last of his supply.
he cost is $10 for a 1 1/2-pound bag, plus $1.50 for shipping.
``he main thing you want is someone who knows enough to keep you out of trouble,'' said r. ohn . eeld r., president of the merican ociety of nesthesiologists.
onetheless, botanicals _ as herbal products are more accurately known _ are enjoying an annual retail market approaching $4 billion, up from $839 million in 1991 and growing about 18 percent a year.
rugs containing ephedra vulgaris, drug-making chemicals and mental medicines increased notably in 1997.
n  spokeswoman did not respond to a request for the correct number.
he  struggled with such questions for decades.
nesthesiologists say they are taking no position on the use in general of herbal remedies, which are sometimes being incorporated into the practice of traditional medicine.
e label correctly, and we have a nonprofit third party give us a certification of good manufacturing practices.''
eanwhile, as other drug makers begin producing herbal pills, the  is struggling to find a way to exercise its limited oversight authority.
octors also singled out two other popular remedies: feverfew, which is said to help ease migraine and ginseng, which is taken to improve vitality.
`` have a feeling over time enough serious cases of addiction will pile up and enough adverse events will be reported to change that perception.''
he later died, and alifornia officials are still investigating the possibility that the herbal supplement caused her death.
ast month, harmanex won the first round in the battle _ which was prompted by erck's complaints about the product _ when a judge issued a preliminary injunction lifting the 's administrative ban of holestin.
hey are not replacements to eating and living right.''
ight control should be exercised in regions that produce natural ephedra, which is used to make methamphetamine, or "ice," and all illegal dealings in the substance should be eliminated, the  said.
bviously we are not breaking any laws.''
nnette ickinson, director of scientific and regulatory affairs for the ouncil for esponsible utrition, a trade organization for producers of dietary supplements, said a consortium of associations submitted a document of manufacturing standards to the ood and rug dministration two years ago.
he 249 contestants this year represented 49 states (no ermont entry), several .. territories, exico, the ahamas and amaica.
t's an issue of where is the profit going to go,'' indler told the committee.
ritics and proponents alike agree on one thing: ephedra is flying off the shelves.
ach day the herbal realm wins new converts, particularly among those who have become disillusioned with the cost and consequences of traditional drugs, distrustful of conventional physicians and convinced that ``natural'' equals ``good.''
``his could be the most important step in the nited tates toward legitimizing herbal medicine,'' yler said.
he  last year took legal action against seven manufacturers that had broken rules requiring advertising be truthful and verifiable.
nd consumers are hungrier for them than ever.
ithout careful chemical tests and large, well-controlled clinical trials such actions are often hard to detect.
 say use food to help meet your goals.''
: he ombat nfantry adge is awarded to infantrymen who have been under enemy fire in a combat zone, with no minimum time limit specified, according to the ictionary of the odern .. ilitary.
:  saw a newspaper photo showing a .. rmy infantry veteran wearing a ombat nfantryman adge.
hat may be, but the critics say consumers have a false sense of security about the regulatory oversight of supplements.
here's reason for your confusion, though.
he  demanded party and government bodies at all levels concentrate on the problems of drug use, planting and trafficking.
otions to dismiss etabolife's lawsuit were filed last month by attorneys on behalf of lackburn and by those for ornick and -.
ost recently, harmanex enlisted r. avid eber, director of the enter for uman utrition at the niversity of alifornia at os ngeles, to study the effects of holestin in adults with moderately elevated cholesterol.
he ermans use a different criterion to assess an herb's benefits _ a doctrine of ``reasonable certainty'' that the herb has the desired effect and is safe, lumenthal said.
ven his mother called, he said, asking, ``ow am  supposed to get my holestin?''
ccording to her husband, who has sued the manufacturer, the fitness club and his wife's personal trainer, she had been taking the recommended dose for five days, ``to lose the last five pounds and firm up.''
nly in rare cases, like the one involving the stimulant ephedra, when there are persistent reports of injury or death, does the government take action against an herbal product.
``t's important to understand that this is not about health and this is not about this is about money and jumping on a bandwagon,'' said avid essler, a former head of the  and now dean of ale niversity's medical school.
ut read and ircus doesn't carry products containing guarana either, she added.
fter being interviewed for the  ews program ``20/20,'' and anticipating a hostile report, llis took pre-emptive action last week.
: ave the tlanta raves ever had a black announcer?
``he said  wasn't the first whom she'd seen with the problem.''
ather, other substances in the herb seem to have diverse actions on brain chemicals, all of which work together to counter depression.
eople think that they can take creatine or other supplements and sit on the couch for two hours to get more muscle and it ain't gonna happen,'' pellman said.
t also encouraged public trials to be held for the offenders in order to educate the public and deter crime, and to mobilize the public to actively participate in the anti-drug drive, according to the .
illy ample, an outfielder for the raves in 1986, announced for the team for two years, 1988 and 1989, said raves publicist len erra.
evertheless, some stores have voluntarily pulled ephedrine from their shelves.
is company's share would be 10 percent of pretax revenues.
he commission also sent e-mail warnings to 1,200 nternet sites that it said had made ``incredible claims'' for drugs, devices and supplements, including herbal remedies that would supposedly ward off .
``he big companies are very protective of their brands.''
``he public should be informed,'' said urley, of the niversity of rkansas.
ut after only a few days of using it as directed to try and heighten athletic performance and burn fat, owers suffered an attack.
``he public has a blind spot with the herbals,'' said r. ill urley, of the ollege of harmacy at the niversity of rkansas.
:  remember reading some months ago that the uller rush o., of uller rush an fame, still exists.
he interest has spawned scores of nternet sites and hundreds of books on various herbs.
n ugust, the accounting office issued a report assailing the agency's findings as sloppy science.
``oods are medicines are foods,'' said oren sraelson, executive director of the tah atural roducts lliance, a trade group based in alt ake ity.
n une 15, in the gray stone federal courthouse in alt ake ity, .. istrict ourt udge ale imball will be asked to determine who is correct.
arolina old is the variety that uropean nobility prized for its sweet, nutty taste and whiter-than-white color after it was washed.
e and his real wife, athi, have two children.
his year's winner was ody-nne axwell a seventh-grader at rdenne igh chool in ingston, amaica.
: ow can someone from amaica participate in the ational pelling ee?
nd next month the merican harmaceutical ssociation will conduct a two-day program on herbal medicine as part of its annual meeting.
an you tell me about this venture, and where  might purchase some?
 heard something on the news about a danger associated with it, but  didn't get the details.
hat worries chultz, the  deputy commissioner for policy.
ut much of the literature is replete with poorly documented health claims and, with few exceptions (among them, yler's books), advocacy prevails over objectivity.
hey mistakenly assume, the critics contend, that the supplements are subject to the same scrutiny as toothpaste, cough drops and other seemingly benign products under the 's watch.
ne woman recently wrote him to say she had purchased eight months' worth of the capsules.
t was discovered that some grassroots level authorities have privately given the green light to drug growers, which has stimulated the spread of drug production and use.
t the same time, according to a report last year in the journal sychosomatics, unsuspecting consumers ``have used herbal remedies with good results only to discover that the benefit was actually derived from the presence of undisclosed medicines,'' including steroids, anti-inflammatory agents, sedatives and hormones.
fficials of 10 hinese customs offices were assisted by drug-seizing dogs, used in 20 drug busts of 15 kilograms.
he new law took dietary supplements out of the underground and into the mainstream, giving manufacturers like harmanex the long-sought right to advertise the potential benefits of herbs, even if the evidence for those benefits was sketchy.
atural laxatives like the herb ascara sagrada are just as habit-forming and harmful to the colon as laxatives sold as drugs.
mong the law's beneficiaries was clashan, a 34-year-old tanford niversity business school graduate who studied hinese history as an undergraduate.
he received a real estate license and spent two years selling real estate in au laire, is., before moving to inneapolis, where she worked in the commercial insurance business for eight years while renovating homes in her off-time.
 few widely available products, including sassafras and comfrey, contain known carcinogens.
atients, however, are often reluctant to tell their doctors that they are using nontraditional approaches like herbal medications, said r. arole . gin, director of the pain management clinic in ort efferson, .. `` think patients fear that it will somehow drive a wedge between the patient-physician relationship,'' she said.
he industry itself is promoting a ``good manufacturing practices'' doctrine.
etabolife claims his comments, as well as the broadcast, were false, and are damaging to the company, which sold an estimated $600 million worth of the supplements last year.
``ll of the concern may prove totally unwarranted down the line,'' eeld said.
till, most doctors remain wary of botanicals, especially when patients choose self-medication with plant extracts over established medical remedies.
yler, who has no financial connection to herbal products and is arguably the nation's leading independent expert on herbal medicine, said: `` feel sorry for the typical consumer.
espite many cautionary tales about adulterated and even dangerous products, herbs formulated as capsules, tinctures, extracts and teas _ and increasingly as additions to common foods like potato chips and fruit drinks _ are now routinely used by a third of merican adults seeking to enhance their health or alleviate their illnesses.
hese days, many customers choose to order products by mail or electronic order, or by phone to a toll-free number, he said.
ut they did not mature until the '90s with the growing consumer interest in ``self-care and controlling one's destiny,'' he said.
 year ago, nne arie apati, a 37-year-old knitwear designer from untington, .., died after suffering a stroke at a fitness club in anhattan.
`` did something very wrong, something very much out of character, and something  am very sorry about,'' he said, and later added: ``etabolife has been looked at inside and out.
ast month, a judge in ritish olumbia ruled that ulia ampagna, a 28-year-old woman from irkland, ash., was not criminally responsible in the deaths of two teen-age girls in a fiery car crash near the .. border in ay 1998.
eber said the total cholesterol counts of those who took the supplement dropped, on average, from 250 to 210.
erbal medicine, the mainstay of therapeutics for centuries before modern purified drugs relegated it to the status of near-quackery, has in the last five years emerged from the fringes of health care with an astonishing flourish and now shows clear signs of joining the medical mainstream.
upplements are also widely sold by marketers like mway, through catalogs and on the nternet.
e pleaded guilty to using a telephone in the trafficking of drugs and was sentenced to five years' probation.
ancy lark, a registered dietician and director of portsedicine rookline, said supplements ``are just that _ supplements.
ith the baby boomers growing older, clashan sensed a growing demand for natural medicines the hinese have used for centuries.
usanne gli, who joined the show for one season, has since been acting in regional theater and appearing in commercials.
llis said he was hopeful that the attention would help him make a point.
`` could feel my heart pounding through my shirt, my hands were jittery and  was hyperventilating, so my roommate took me to the emergency room,'' he recalled in a recent interview.
 epartment of ealth committee met ednesday to accept public comment on the regulation change.
hus, countless consumers are wasting their money on useless products or jeopardizing their health on hazardous ones.
he sentiment is shared by many mainstream physicians.
riedman said the industry's growth could be even greater as more retailers make room for brand-name supplements on their already crowded shelves.
ohnson was an accountant, sales representative and residential contractor before launching ``ometime'' in 1984.
ts advocates say it decreases appetite, raises metabolism, improves concentration, burns fat and even enhances sexual performance.
hortly thereafter, federal authorities impounded 10 tons of red yeast rice that had come into the ort of os ngeles from the shipment is now sitting in a storage facility in exico.
  hina announced today it will carry out a massive targeted fight against narcotics-related crimes from this month through the end of eptember, to curb rampant drug smuggling and the increase of drug use.
he  set up a general headquarters today for the campaign and published a hotline number to take reports and opinions and offer legal advice.
fter a lobbying effort by the diet supplement industry, a congressional subcommittee asked the eneral ccounting ffice to investigate the research behind the 's proposal.
ince then, she been hosting ``ewton's pple,'' a public  children's program.