ome officials in aryland look to the sian oyster as a potential replacement for the native oyster, which has been decimated by disease and pollution.
hey worry that the sian oysters could bring new diseases or adapt to the hesapeake so well that they squeeze out native species of oysters and clams.
he sian oysters are believed to be resistant to the diseases that have killed off native oysters in the hesapeake.
``e have to try to make it work,'' he said.
``t was going to be the '90s ... then the year 2000, then it was the year 2010,'' he said.
ast year's native oyster harvest was about 23,000 bushels, less than 1 percent of the figure 30 years ago.
n desperation, the two bay states have turned to the hinese oyster, which has been grown for about 30 years in regon and is believed to be immune to the hesapeake's oyster diseases.
he aryland epartment of atural esources also is considering introducing a nonnative  and, they hope, disease-resistant  species to the bay.
 decision about whether to introduce a new species of hinese oyster into the hesapeake ay has been put off a few months longer because of delays in a scientific study, aryland officials say.
y early next year, state and federal agencies expect to complete research on restoring the native oyster to the hesapeake ay.
aryland may be rushing crucial research on introducing sian oysters into the hesapeake ay, the states of elaware and ew ersey said this week, joining several federal agencies in asking that the new species be studied further.
he niversity of aryland's orn oint aboratory in ambridge, d., is home to research on the hesapeake ay's native oyster, rassostrea virginica,@ and an sian oyster that some officials want to introduce into the bay.
hen they applied this year, many of the plants were shut out, officials say.
``e're dead in the water,'' ucker rown said.
``'m certainly not going to tell you that we can't meet it,'' anmer said.
"f you spend $10,000 and make $5,000, it doesn't take long for you to get out of it.
or decades, the rowns, like most watermen, have adapted as diseases, pollution and commercial fisheries have taken their toll on the hesapeake ay and its rivers.
nce the hesapeake ay's premiere species, native oysters have been virtually wiped out due to over-harvesting and disease.
aybe the government will bring in a new kind of oyster that can survive in the bay.
mong their questions: ill the new oyster bring a new disease?
ut others, including several state legislators and federal scientists, have said that much more research is needed before the sian oyster can be certified as safe for the bay.
ut on the water, the oysters have kept dying.
``ithout major funding, there's no way we're going to meet that 2010 goal,'' said ennsylvania ov.
here were once almost 2,000 of the boats working the bay, but today, they number near 30, with only about 10 used for oystering.
ive years of planning, they say, have left the bay no cleaner than it was when the ``hesapeake 2000'' pact was signed.
ut over the past three decades, the bay's oysters have been ravaged by pollution and a pair of diseases.
he hope is that the new species could take the native oyster's former role in the bay: as a moneymaker for watermen and a natural filter for polluted water.
cientists worry it will bring in disease; based on their concerns, aryland state legislators are trying to block it.
efore bringing in a worker under this program, an employer must prove that no .. residents are willing to do the job.
his year,  officials expect about 15,000.
ederal funding for oyster restoration efforts in aryland and irginia exceeded $4 million this year, organizers of aturday's event said.
or weeks this fall, even as t. ary's ounty celebrated the beginning of oyster season with festivals and contests, ucker and gnes rown couldn't find oysters.
ust a few miles across the hesapeake ay ridge from nnapolis, the waters of ent arrows, which leads to the bay, were home to 13 oyster packing houses at about the time arris' opened in 1947.
``hen one part of it dies, you have to figure out, how am  going to get to another part?''
``hat we want to do is lock in a better bay program that will be a hundred times more effective,'' ilchrest said.
nstead, their numbers have fallen off sharply because of pollution, low oxygen and endemic disease.
he dwindling supply of oysters in the hesapeake ay  last season's haul was about 24,000 bushels, less than 1 percent of what it was three decades ago  has hurt him the most.
hat is because hesapeake watermen pulled an all-time low of about 25,000 bushels of oysters from the bay last year, compared with 80,000 in 1993  and a staggering 15 million back in the glory days of 1885.
he studies will also examine the potential impact of introducing a new species of oyster that appears resistant to the diseases.
he managed reserve method is ``the beginning of a new approach to managing oysters and oyster disease,'' said oldsborough of the hesapeake ay oundation.
``ut the federal government is talking about reducing the amount of (water cleanup money) that goes to ennsylvania by almost $25 million'' next year, he said.
tate governors from around the watershed have approved a proposal that would create a massive new pool of funding for the bay, with $12 billion from the federal government.
t took three, with ashington, the states and the federal government spending a combined $1 billion a year.
everal organizations and federal agencies worked together to manage the project, including the ational ceanic and tmospheric dministration and the yster ecovery artnership, a nonprofit group whose mission is to restore the bay's oyster population.
ucker rown grew up a waterman in a family of watermen, and in his 67 years, he said, he's just about tried it all.
his grim portrait doesn't mean that there are no oysters left in the hesapeake.
he states issued a statement saying that the sian oyster is still ``a virtual unknown'' and could bring diseases or other ecological problems that would spread to their coasts.
``fter it's done, it's going to be irreversible,'' she said.
``e are not going to introduce an oyster that we have questions about,'' said ecretary of atural esources onald ranks.
mong the bay's problems, one of the worst has been the decline of the native oyster rassostrea virginica,@ once so populous that its reefs poked out of the water.
he ecks were among two dozen watermen, some scuba-diving and some using hand tongs, who set out to get their share of the disease-free oysters from three managed reserves, known as mory ollow and lunts ar in the hester iver and olingbroke ands in the hoptank iver.
he oysters were spawned at the niversity of aryland's enter for nvironmental cience, then planted in the managed reserves, where they grew under the supervision of scientists.
he study, by the .. rmy orps of ngineers, is intended to guide the governors of irginia and aryland as they decide whether to allow the oyster rassostrea ariakensis@ to reproduce in the hesapeake.
oth irginia and aryland have been spending several million dollars each year to restore native populations, and they are considering introducing a heartier nonnative species to the bay.
he tools were unwieldy, including several federal agencies and an array of state governments that eventually included elaware, est irginia and ew ork.
or example, she said, the ush administration's proposed 2006 budget calls for cutting spending on the federal clean-water fund to $730 million, from $1.1 billion last year.
n the other side is arrison's yster acking, another of the handful of oyster houses still in operation.
n places like ilghman, watermen still motor up to the dock at arrison's packing company to deliver their day's haul, just as they have for generations, and inside, shuckers still wait to crack them open in record time, as they, too, have done for generations.
e see the old generation that's passed on, and there's no younger one to take their place.
he watermen will next be able to harvest oysters, which also help filter the water, at the three sites ov. 13.
till, he said, it might be two years before the changes go through.
ut some oysters do survive in the bay.
``he major problems that the hesapeake ay agreement was designed to diminish are still there.''
t has emerged as an issue now because the native oyster  crucial to filtering the bay's waters and supporting its fleet of watermen  has almost vanished from the hesapeake.
ven so, cleanup officials say, they expected to accomplish more by now than they have.
t the orn oint ab, eritt said, researchers are trying to determine whether the sian oyster's reproduction would interfere with the reproduction of the native oyster, and how well it would fare in the less-salty waters of the upper hesapeake.
ysters, an important filter for the water and once the mainstay of the region's fishing industry, have been decimated, their numbers dropping to historic lows.
n fact, experts say by some measures  such as the declining oyster population and large areas of oxygen-poor ``bad water''  the bay seems to be getting worse.
hen the results are released this summer, they will be forwarded to an independent committee for an evaluation that is expected to take six weeks, said ete ensen, an official with the aryland epartment of atural esources.
ast weekend, three generations of the eck family  ill, son raig and father ohn, 76  boarded their boat with renewed optimism as nearly 4,000 bushels of disease-free oysters were made available for harvesting for the first time since they were hatched and planted three years ago.
n an earlier time, they would have been prepping their dredges for oyster season, but most won't be dredging this year.
fter that, ranks said, the data will be reviewed by a panel of experts appointed by hrlich and irginia ov.
n addition to the managed reserve program, some researchers have turned to creating sanctuaries filled with oysters that watermen are barred from harvesting.
he managed reserve program is one of many efforts to reverse what scientists have called a disturbing trend.
s lobbying efforts begin, the executive council voted to create a panel of experts which would report back by uly1 with details on how the regional financing authority might be created.
mong state-funded cleanup efforts has been a $250 million bond issue last year to pay for sewage treatment plant upgrades, oung said.
he hesapeake xecutive ouncil, a group of state and federal officials overseeing the bay cleanup, voted to support a new central financing authority with the power to disperse billions to various hesapeake-related projects.
enjamin rumbles, assistant administrator for water at the nvironmental rotection gency, said the pared-back funding of $730 million in the president's budget request ``is part of a multi-year effort to commit $6.8 billion through 2011'' to the fund, which he said is intended to provide seed money to state-based loan programs to improve sewage treatment infrastructure.
``obody shucks an oyster anymore.''
"oung people now don't want to shuck oysters," ilghman said.
he pollution, from farms and sewage plants across the bay's 64,000-square-mile watershed, causes algae blooms that suck oxygen from the water.
``ome days  sit here,  don't want to do this anymore.
``here's no one else,'' said aren ertel, of ..
ow, members of ongress up and down the ast oast are lobbying for the cap on guest workers to be raised.
ust a few years ago, there were thousands of people oystering in aryland; this year, they expect fewer than 150.
his year, even the harvest of gulf oysters was stalled by storms.
``hen the crabs start running in the summer ... and you don't have this infrastructure to pick them anymore, it's going to be bad,'' said ack rooks, president of the ..
``t's a dying breed,'' hillips said.
ill it fail to multiply and instead die, leaving the bay no better off?
hesapeake ay seafood processors say they're facing catastrophe this year because a cap on certain ``guest workers'' is keeping out immigrants who usually pick crabs and shuck oysters.
he decline of the region's oyster population has changed life on the water, but the rowns keep looking ahead.
is firm usually has about 30 immigrant workers.
ill it multiply so rapidly that it overtakes native species?
n five years alone, the aryland oyster harvest has dropped 92 percent, hitting a record low last year with 26,000 bushels.
xperts say the problem was a desire to plan all pollution efforts in minute detail while keeping major changes on hold.
``e will be up in the halls of ongress within the next 45 days to lobby for the additional federal support,'' arner said.
dding to the undesirability in these jobs, experts say, is the fact that in recent years they have changed from year-round to seasonal because there no longer are enough shellfish in the polluted bay to sustain them.
n all, ieling said, about 20 plants  all on the astern hore  were unable to get the workers they applied for.
hen there is the hinese oyster, which governors in aryland and irginia believe might resist disease and provide a natural pollution filter.
``usiness as usual won't work,'' said former irginia ov.
hey urged officials in aryland, where ov.
n 2000, the foundation rated the bay a 28.
aryland officials responded ednesday that they would not make any moves before they were sure the new oyster is safe.
hile watermen have been able to harvest oysters elsewhere, they agreed not to harvest in the managed reserves for several years until the majority of the oysters grew to four inches, one inch bigger than the state's legal size.
lso, the yster ecovery artnership, an alliance of organizations, businesses and individuals, has planted more than 330 million disease-free oyster seeds from the niversity of aryland's enter for nvironmental cience in 33 locations in the bay since 2000.
hat study, performed by the .. rmy orps of ngineers, could be finished in the next couple of weeks, he said.
t called for a central authority with 20 percent of its funding drawn from state sources and 80 percent from the federal government.
t was touted as ``merica's premier watershed restoration partnership,'' supported by the nvironmental rotection gency and representatives from ennsylvania, aryland, irginia and ashington, ..
ish and ildlife ervice, nvironmental rotection gency and ational ceanographic and tmospheric dministration.
arris' shucks, packs and sells them at its packing company and serves them in its dockside restaurant overlooking the narrows.
arris' is a holdout in a devastated industry; one of the last oyster-packing companies on the hesapeake, where once there were hundreds.
his would mean reducing nitrogen and phosphorus, found in suburban lawn fertilizer, processed sewage and animal manure.
hese pollutants, when washed downstream to the bay, feed algae blooms that suck oxygen out of the water.
lready there is no shortage of opposition to this plan.
"o one here is oystering anymore," he said, shaking his head before adding a footnote.
``e could have gotten to work,'' atuszeski said.
anmer pointed to some recent successes, including aryland's passage of a ``flush tax'' to reduce pollution from sewage plants and the 's requirement that plants must further clean the water they dump into the watershed.
... ou find something else to take its place.''
atuszeski, the bay program's leader from 1991 to 2001, said officials knew their work would revolve around renovating sewage plants and keeping farm manure out of streams.
eeming with raw sewage, animal waste and fertilizer runoff, yet responsible for half the hesapeake ay's fresh water, the usquehanna iver is the most endangered river in the nited tates, according to a report released this week by merican ivers, a national conservation group.
 he agreement promised to increase the number of oysters tenfold.
 he 2000 agreement targeted the problem of low dissolved oxygen, a condition in which fish and crabs can't breathe.
e's helped move seed out of hatcheries to oyster bars, and he's kept a hand in the aryland atermen's ssociation.
ouglas enkins r. of irginia's orthern eck, said he's seen the signs both on land  where the number of watermen has dropped because of low oyster harvests  and in the water.
``e're so low that the next stop is zero,'' said ete ensen, an official with the epartment of atural esources.
'm going to catch tourists instead.
``e are totally dependent on this system,'' he said of the -2 program.
he diseases, one of them introduced when another strain of sian oyster was placed in the bay decades ago, kill oysters before they grow large.
arvesting oysters, crabs or rockfish for 10 to 15 hours a day earns eck just $25,000 a year.
"his boat costs $10,000 a year to keep up," ond said.
ithout immigrant workers, ohn raham said, he has only about 18 local laborers.
t mory ollow, the seven participating watermen collected just 10 to 15 bushels.
he laboratory's work with the sian oyster, rassostrea ariakensis,@ is part of a larger scientific and political debate.
``ll that is lacking is the political will to get on with the job.''
overnors are pledging to walk the halls of ongress lobbying for $12 billion in needed support.
n the 1970s and '80s, before diseases started their rampant spread through the bay, the average harvest reported to the aryland epartment of atural esources was more than 2 million bushels.
he window for applications opens in ctober, but employers can apply no more than four months before they need workers.
ased on their recommendations, hrlich and arner will decide whether to move forward on the oysters or to request more research, ranks said.
s optimism about the new oyster has grown in the administration of aryland ov.
or centuries, the hesapeake has been synonymous with oysters.
ranks said ednesday that all the necessary research has been compressed into a year.
s drawn up by the aliles panel, the federal commitment would be spread over time, beginning with $1 billion this year and building to $2.5 billion in 2010.
elaware and ew ersey will not have a say.
n 2005, led by the rmy orps of ngineers, the two states are expected to release a draft nvironmental mpact tatement evaluating oyster recovery.
ut aryland and irginia have held the hope that the one-year study underway by the .. rmy orps of ngineers will be sufficient.
dward . endell, , is backing a proposal in the state legislature to issue another $800 million in bonds for water and sewage system improvements, to be voted on in coming days.
any of the remaining skipjacks have become museum pieces, like the artha ewis in altimore, preserved by the hesapeake eritage onservancy, and the ..
ll that must be repeated up to 600 times a day, yielding a daily wage that might reach $120 on a good day, rooks said.
he failures leave a bewildering disconnect for those who are removed from the nitty-gritty of environmental policy.
n paper is the bay as national treasure, on the way to resurrection.
ut if you turn off oute 50 at aston, and cut west toward the bay, the road quickly gives way to farmland, brown and drying corn stalks, pumpkin patches and fields dipped in gold at the hands of fall before opening onto the water.
icking crabs, for instance, requires scraping off the cooked crab's gills, cleaning out its organs, breaking off the mouth and prying meat out of tiny cavities.
t the clanging of a bell, every 20 minutes or so, cars stop and the bridge slowly lifts as if raising a hand in greeting to the boats coming in and out of the harbor.
ollier, now in the hesapeake ay aritime useum in t. ichaels.
ere, the mighty oyster is toasted in the wood-paneled oyster bars of nnapolis  carvey's, 'rien's and the iddleton avern  and honored along the bay's shores at festivals, shucking contests and skipjack races.
or instance, boat anchors used to come up with a menagerie of tiny bottom-dwelling animals crawling on them: sand fleas, worms, snails.
``f something goes wrong, what's any worse than what we've got?''
e said the hesapeake officials had been told to wait until after last fall's national elections to launch their efforts.
he towns along the peninsula's west coast, places like t. ichaels, xford and risfield, aren't easy to reach down twisting two-lane roads that dead end at the water's edge.
he summer of 2003 was one of the worst on record, as nearly 40 percent of the hesapeake became a suffocating expanse that environmentalists dubbed the ``dead zone.''
pening a cold, tenacious oyster quickly without harming or slicing the tender meat within takes skill and gumption.
he events spotlighting oysters in ctober and ovember unfold like oysters on the half shell  by the dozen.
cientists point to the havoc caused in the bay ecosystem by other nonnative species: he mute swan and beaverlike nutria chew up crucial grasses, and the toothy northern snakehead has worried fishermen in the otomac iver.
 aryland congressman is contemplating legislation to replace the voluntary cleanup strategy with strict regulatory requirements.
illed with art galleries, coffee shops and restaurants, the town of aston makes a good base for exploring the region.
illiam . aker, the environmentalist group's president, spoke from a podium emblazoned with the slogan ``top the elay.
he front parlor is home to an acclaimed restaurant whose menu relies on local ingredients.
hose oysters command a higher price and have a better chance of reproducing, organizers said.
ut scientists believe there are many potential downsides  even beyond the dinner-table prospects of an oyster that can resemble an orange portobello mushroom cap.
e said if the scientists don't start putting the non-native oyster into aryland waters soon, someone else could throw some overboard.
phill and upstream from the bay, thousands of acres of ennsylvania crop- and pastureland abut the banks of the usquehanna or the creeks and streams that feed it.
oogie opsey of echanicsville, d., who works for the rowns, smashed shells down a metal chute with a long pole, clearing space to shuck some more.
ennsylvania's massive usquehanna, the bay's biggest tributary, tops a list of 10 merican rivers with uncertain futures, including hio's ittle iami iver, ennessee's oan reek and outh arolina's antee iver.
or early settlers, oyster reefs were so abundant that they posed a hazard for navigation, and with the introduction of canning in the 1800s, the hesapeake became the source for oysters around the world.
ost days, the stainless steel sinks and tables inside their shuck house were shining, untouched.
taff researcher obbye ratt contributed to this report.
hat's how it's always been in venue, a t. ary's neighborhood with stacks of just-chopped firewood, sheds, wheelbarrows and tarps.
``t started to dwindle down, and then it just, like  dropped,'' said im everidge the rowns' middle daughter, who works with her parents in the shuck house.
eaves yellowed and crab apples fell, and often the radio played country songs to no one, echoing through the empty cinderblock building.
everidge shoveled ice around jars of sealed oysters.
here are ilghman sland ay, the . illard awes yster and ull oast in risfield, the t. ichaels ysterfest, the rbanna yster estival, and the biggest pearl of them all for oyster lovers _the t. ary's ounty yster estival this weekend, home to the ational yster hucking hampionship and ational yster ook-ff ontest.
arris eafood ouse in hester, d.
his year, even the gulf couldn't fill their early orders after heavy rains closed some oyster beds.
t has become particularly valuable around the bay, where the process of removing crab and oyster meat from shells is still done largely by hand.
f you ask, you may find the oysters you order are from ong sland or the ulf of exico, but in the height of oyster season, when the annual grind is under way, you are just as likely to get that coveted response, "from a local oyster bed."
"f it wasn't for that,  wouldn't be able to keep afloat."
nd seafood processors are scrambling to find other workers or face shutting down for the season  and possibly for good.
hat process was supposed to take one year.
n the past two years, the rowns have shifted more and more to buying from the ulf of exico.
ut most also said the cleanup effort was not close to meeting a self-imposed deadline of a healthy bay by 2010.
ome scientists and watermen say the bay shows few signs that anybody has spent five years trying to save it.
verharvesting and pollution have taken a toll on the native oyster, but far bigger threats to the species are two parasites that attack them, ermo and , which were first detected in the bay in the 1960s.
he farms are so small and far-flung that state environmental agencies struggle to bring all of them into compliance with laws governing pollutant runoff.
hey are then transported to laboratories and oyster-seeding programs around the state.
ut even she wouldn't say the cleanup effort is on pace to meet the 2010 deadline.
he shell landed back in the water with a splash.
he shellfish processors turned to the -2 program, bringing in hundreds of exicans and other immigrants to spend several months in the plants.
dded together, their requests totaled about 800 workers, he said.
ut some immigration experts say lifting the cap on laborers isn't the solution.
ow did the bay get to this condition?
 survey of the bay's grasses in 2003, found about 64,000 acres  35 percent of the goal.
hese migrant workers have come to dominate shellfish processing over the past decade  doing dirty, repetitive work that machines can't and mericans won't, employers say.
ombined, these factors have caused a stunning decline in aryland oyster harvests: from about 2,600,000 bushels in 1974-75 to about 26,000 bushels last year.
ost of them, said merican ivers resident ebecca . odder, are befouled by raw sewage and urban and farm runoff  problems made worse by population growth and cuts to federal cleanup money.
oday, oystermen use motorboats more than skipjacks, and they employ other methods, too, like hand-tonging and diving.
ut supporting the financing authority doesn't make it so: here's still the matter of persuading ongress to come up with the bulk of the $15 billion needed to pay for the plan.
irst expected this month at the latest, the report is now due in une or uly because of a delay in creating a computer model of how the oysters might spread and reproduce, officials said.
he idea is to jump-start the massive cleanup effort, which critics say has been bogged down because of excessive bureaucracy and insufficient funding.
he program has become more popular across the country in recent years and has been used to fill jobs from lawn care workers to lifeguards.
lmost 200 million oysters have been planted since 2001, officials said.
nvironmentalists say the effort has been consumed by bureaucracy that has allowed the bay to decay further.
he ecks had worked diligently along the hester iver, ill eck dragging a hand tong through the water as his son and father sorted and measured their catch.
ut many observers wonder how the states will get the money since the federal government is already tightening budgets.
he leaders of several states in the hesapeake ay watershed agreed onday to lobby apitol ill for about $12 billion for cleaning up the bay.
n nnapolis, d., several state legislators have been pushing bills that would delay any oyster introduction to allow for more research.
obert . hrlich r. () has been a vocal proponent of the sian oyster, not to make a decision as scheduled early next year.
ark . arner (), the hesapeake executive council's outgoing chairman, said the lobbying effort would begin soon.
revious outside studies have warned that perhaps more years of research are necessary before the oyster can be declared safe.
athilde gge, program administrator for the yster ecovery artnership, one of the project managers, said many mory ollow oysters were smaller than four inches and couldn't be harvested.
ulie hompson, a biologist with the ish and ildlife ervice, said ednesday that the federal agencies were concerned that the sian oyster would be impossible to remove once released in the wild.
nd at the recent t. ary's ounty yster estival, which draws thousands and crowns a national shucking champion, organizers had to ship in shellfish from exas and ouisiana.
he t. ary's ounty yster estival, one of the heseapeake ay's largest celebrations, is being held this weekend, ct. 16-17, at the fairgrounds in eonardtown, d.
n one side of the bridge is the ridge estaurant, which advertises oysters with crab imperial, and the airbank ackle store, which sells tackle, ice and bait.
``ore of the same is asking for trouble.''
ndeed, fall oyster celebrations still abound in bayside communities on the hesapeake, where old traditions die hard and the oysters remain as much a symbol of the season's arrival as cider, apples and pumpkins.
hirteen years before, the same entities had pledged to reduce the pollutants nitrogen and phosphorus in the bay by 40 percent.
``e're desperate,'' gnes rown said one morning this fall when people kept calling and knocking on their door, looking for oysters, and the couple spent much of the night driving to deliver bait.
imilar scenes are unfolding these days up and down the hesapeake ay, where the annual oyster season is becoming an endangered tradition.
layton seafood company in ambridge, d.
ad wasn't able to fill his orders.''
ade urphy, a third-generation waterman with 40 years of oystering behind him, runs charter tours on his skipjack, the ebecca . uark, built in 1886.
ut the annual good cheer surrounding the season is waning.
orman urphy is a middle-aged waterman who grew up on ilghman sland working the bay, as his own son does now.
ucker rown pulled off his rubber apron and gloves to check on the empty shells pouring out as his wife walked in with a clipboard of orders.
aking handfuls at a time, uth flung the oysters back into the water.
he idea was, ``if we can do this ... nobody else in the world has an excuse,'' said illiam atuszeski, who was then overseeing the bay cleanup for the .
ertilizer nutrients and filth from the usquehanna is a chief cause of the algae blooms and pollution that suck oxygen from the hesapeake ay, decimating crab, oyster, fish and aquatic plant populations.
n return, state officials promised to open up the oyster bars periodically, particularly around the holidays when demand is higher.
t's made enkins, the orthern eck waterman, skeptical of all deadlines for the hesapeake's comeback.
``ow people cannot say, 'ebecca, we don't know what needs to be done,' '' she said.
``t didn't happen because people were afraid that we didn't have the numbers right.''
he group aims to harvest the seeded oysters in time to save them from being attacked by ermo or , within three years.
n ogwood arbor on ilghman, fishing boats still outnumber sailboats and pleasure craft.
he usquehanna exemplifies ``the crisis we're highlighting in this report, that when it rains in merica, raw sewage pours into our rivers and streams  in an increasing amount,'' she said.
``verybody that was on the water got off the water because you can't make a living.''
cross the harbor from urphy's slip are a handful of skipjacks  a vanishing fleet of traditional oyster dredge boats and the last commercial sailing fishing fleet in orth merica.
onald eritt, a scientist there, said that each year the lab produces about 100 million tiny native oysters, which are called spat.
ep. ayne ilchrest, -d., doesn't want to wait for 2010.
 nderwater grasses are supposed to grow to 185,000 acres by 2010.
he agreement to clean the bay in 10 years promised twice as much underwater grass, 10 times as many oysters, and water as pristine as in the 1950s.
ilchrest wants legislation that would force the cleanup to spend less time on bureaucracy, as well as stronger regulations and punishment for those who pollute, he said.
alfway through a 10-year program to save the hesapeake ay, political leaders are acknowledging that the vaunted cleanup is faltering and are calling for major changes midstream.
nd scientists are exploring the mass introduction of a hinese oyster to replace the vanishing native breed.
he new agreement, an attempt to jump-start the effort, made more sweeping promises.
ysters, unlike fish and crabs, can't swim away from ``bad water'' areas, so they are weakened or killed.
ome scientists worry they won't have answers that quickly, but the rowns are tired of waiting.
``eople suddenly woke up to the fact that they're going to be out of business this spring,'' said ill ieling, executive director of the hesapeake ay eafood ndustries ssociation, which represents seafood plants around the bay.
s a result, experts say, a once-large labor pool has vanished as local workers found better jobs.
ut hesapeake processors say a quirk of the program puts them at a disadvantage.
ome environmentalists say this planning marathon was actually stalling to allow politicians to avoid changes that would anger farmers and sewage customers.
hen the deadline came in 2000, they had fallen short.
he annual figure has fallen to $500,000.
ince then, the rating has changed  to 27.
he visa program at issue, known as -2, allows workers to enter the country for seasonal work outside of agriculture and then return home.
ears of paltry oyster harvests have left ill eck, a waterman on aryland's astern hore for 21 of his 39 years, wondering if the business will exist by the time his 9-year-old son reaches adulthood.
``ennsylvania is committed to reducing the nutrients and sediments that flow into our local streams and, in doing that, restoring the hesapeake ay,'' said ennsylvania epartment of nvironmental rotection spokesman harlie oung.
he regional financing authority was proposed late last year by a panel of experts chaired by former irginia ov.
odder said federal cuts to ennsylvania's cleanup budget reflect the situation nationally.
efore the meeting, the hesapeake ay oundation led a rally in which speakers accused government officials of dragging their feet on bay cleanup measures.
he hesapeake ay oundation assesses the bay's overall health annually and rates it on a 100-point scale.
dward . endell (), the council's new chairman.
onday's annual meeting, at a conference center on the grounds of ount ernon, a., provided a chance for officials from irginia, aryland, ennsylvania, the istrict of olumbia and the .. nvironmental rotection gency to assess the bay's health.
ut watermen still bring in salty, succulent oysters every year, and those are abundant at bay restaurants, raw bars, seafood stores and festivals.
t the lessing of the leet, where for decades t. ary's residents have marked the beginning of the season, there were hardly any workboats to sanctify this year.
he effects are deeply felt in t. ary's, where so much of life once revolved around oysters.
ow, it stands alone in the shadow of the ent arrows ridge.
t the height of oyster season, which began ct. 1 and runs through the end of arch, arris' rolls out an all-you-can-eat buffet, featuring oysters served seven different ways.
t the height of the season, shuckers line up in the oyster house, don rugged work gloves and pry open the shells, shucking hundreds an hour (they get paid by the pound).
rom the dock, ason uth, a worker at arris', began culling the pile with an expert's eye, selecting those to keep and shuck and those to return to the bay.
arther down the road, aptain uddy arrison, who owns the company, also runs the hesapeake ouse, offering old-fashioned seafood dining and lodging overlooking the bay.
 niversity of aryland consultant has estimated that the river contributes 40 percent of the nitrogen and 20 percent of the phosphorus  two key ingredients in fertilizers  to the bay.
ne of them was the raham and ollins plant in ampton, a., which asked for 100 guest workers and received none.
hose animals are gone, and probably dead, enkins said.
he prospect of a new oyster is already stirring controversy, though.
``he little shells or carcasses are about all you see,'' enkins said.
ach year the charter business gets bigger and bigger, urphy said.
t was a daunting task: to reduce pollution spewing from a multitude of city sewers, farms and factories across a 64,000-square-mile watershed.
`` don't think it's the right message to send.''
bout 90 percent of aryland's crab meat is produced by plants using -2 workers, said ouglas ipton, a professor of resource management at the niversity of aryland.
rom the ent arrows, they are a quick jaunt to the far side of the hesapeake, heading south and east on oute 50, down the thumb print of land dangling between the bay and the tlantic.
ut first, the bay cleanup bureaucracy worked on official water standards  figuring out exactly how clean the bay should be.
hese spat are grown in a bath of water taken from the hoptank iver, with their food sometimes supplemented by specially grown algae.
his route is frequently clogged with traffic headed toward the tlantic oast and aryland's astern hore in the summer months, but fewer people stop to explore the other stretch of coast, along the hesapeake ay.
nd just in case, they're thinking of ideas for a new business  another try.
ut lined up in ogwood arbor are four majestic skipjacks growing old very, very gracefully, their massive white sails lashed to the masts.
n a recent unday morning, the harbor was peaceful, with only a few watermen cleaning and fixing their boats.
avid hillips a waterman from ittman, d., said he welcomes any effort to increase the oyster supply.
``hen 2010 gets here,  guess it'll be 2020.''
he nine watermen at the lunts ar site fared better, collecting 97 bushels.
rganizers would try to determine how to ensure that oystermen take home a bigger haul before the next harvesting, gge said.
``e've made only modest progress,'' ebecca anmer, head of the  bay program, conceded in a recent interview.
hat goal, set in the landmark hesapeake 2000 agreement five years ago, would require huge reductions that have yet to be seen in several pollutants.
r maybe, once again, they'll think of something new with which to patch their business together.
ven after uropean colonization, its harvests were bountiful enough that the astern hore town of risfield, d., was built on a foundation of discarded oyster shells.
nd on the otomac  famous for its yster ars five or six decades ago, when shots were fired over fishing rights and fast boats slipped past the authorities at night  little or no harvest is anticipated this year.
onetheless, the commercial fishery business  the packing and shipping that put hesapeake ay oysters on the map  has all but collapsed.
hen there's the bay they know  sickly and murky and perhaps getting worse.
ark rikorian, of the enter for mmigration tudies, said that shellfish processors either should pay wages high enough to attract merican workers or invent a way to mechanize the work.
``he presence of these foreign workers creates a dependency'' among employers, rikorian said.
n 1987, the irginia arine esources ommission issued more than 2,000 licenses for oystering; in 2003, it issued about 300.
o answer such questions fully might take many years of research, according to reports by the ational cademy of ciences and a trio of federal agencies: the ..
he oyster debate is part of a larger, multibillion-dollar struggle to return the bay to its 1950s condition by 2010.
anmer, the 's bay director, defended the work, saying it's been slow but necessary for all the cooperating agencies to buy in.
rom 1920 to 1970, before the oyster began its rapid decline, the industry contributed $65 million annually to the state of aryland, a figure that didn't include the tourism it attracted.
ut at the current rate, the nitrogen goal won't be met until 2038, and problems with oxygen-poor areas haven't changed.
`` need at least 80 to open the doors,'' raham said.
eter ranchot is that the new oyster, which can grow to a mammoth eight inches across, will bring ``eight-inch viruses.''
``t took us over an hour to catch a bushel.''
nce touted as a national model, the cleanup effort has unraveled into what some environmentalists call a bureaucratic farce.
``here really hasn't been a noticeable improvement,'' said enise reitburg, a senior scientist at the mithsonian nvironmental esearch enter in dgewater, d.
``t's a beautiful concept in a sense because it's brought commercial interests and environmental interests together,'' said illiam oldsborough, a senior scientist at the hesapeake ay oundation.
`` think their process would benefit from a little more deliberation,'' said oy iller, administrator of fisheries for the elaware ivision of ish and ildlife.
he festival features oysters in every imaginable combination: raw, steamed, fried or ockefeller; stewed in chowder or mixed with cocktail sauce; or served with a swig of beer in a shot glass.
ast aston and t. ichaels, ilghman sland is one of those flecks, set on the tip of a peninsula connected to the mainland by a drawbridge across napp's arrows.
t is possible, too, to celebrate the season with a quieter sojourn, steering clear of the crowded festivals and venturing into sleepier coastal communities.
n a crystal clear afternoon, the light air hinting of fall, the iss randy motored up to a dock on the ent arrows in rasonville, d., in front of ..
he consequences are even more troubling for watermen, for whom the bay provides both a livelihood and cultural touchstone.
n ednesday morning, shuckers stood on wooden boxes, spraying mud as they pried open oysters, dropping the slippery meat into dripping pails.
eaped like a pile of rocks in the middle of the boat was the morning's haul  oysters, the rough and craggy bottom dwellers that have been the shining jewels of the hesapeake ay for generations.
enerations of watermen worked long winter days gathering them; shuckers spent nights cracking them open; families scalded, fried, steamed and ate them.
ond was cleaning out his skipjack, the ister aybe, with a vision of running his own tours in the summer and hauling down to lorida come winter.
t features a giant raw oyster bar, cooking demonstrations, live music and an oyster-shucking competition.
hey, too, are holdouts, though called upon less and less to dredge.
levon ilghman has been working at arrison's since he was a boy watching his parents shuck oysters there.
`` wouldn't hold it up as a success story, put it that way,'' said ecologist obert owarth of ornell niversity.
ut algae and sediment cloud the water, blocking sunlight.
ll noted some signs of progress: a new ``flush tax'' to improve sewer facilities in aryland and rivers in ennsylvania that have been reopened to migrating fish.
hat would be a major increase over current funding for the bay, which arner estimated at $230 million annually.
he small flecks of black that mark them on a map can persuade those short on time or unwise in the ways of the bay to save the detour for another day.
he report also cites runoff from urban centers and the hundreds of sewer pipes that overflow in rainy weather, spewing human waste and garbage into the river.
"ee," he said, picking up one in a fluid motion and knocking it with a quick tap against the pile, making a hollow thunk.
inally, this week, they got a shipment.
`` think it's a great opportunity,'' said hillips, who hopes such efforts will save his profession.
eafood plants do not need help until pril.
``he feds are not contributing their fair share to solving the problem,'' she said.
t. atrick reek curls around the rowns' land, with family and friends living along both shores.
hillips drove his boat 20 miles to mory ollow, a nearly two-hour trip, to participate.
he two states' criticism marks a new turn in the saga of rassostrea riakensis, a native of hina that has recently caused unusual divisions within the staid world of shellfish management.
hen individual jurisdictions were to write detailed plans for cleaning up each tributary.
ike the watermen, shuckers are born into this hearty business more often than not.
hey were designed to be agile to make multiple quick passes over an oyster bed, dragging dredges behind them.
ut this year, the seasonal-work visa program that provides these laborers hit its limit of 66,000 workers on the earliest date ever, an. 3.
uilt at the peak of the oyster rush, in the late 1890s and early years of the 20th century, skipjacks are light, inexpensive boats that can navigate the shallow waters of the bay.
obert hrlich, a epublican, pessimism has spread among scientists.
erald aliles, who led a committee that studied the bay cleanup last year.
he plans, due by 2002, still aren't finished.
hat has left many businesses empty-handed, including ski resorts in ew ngland, fish plants in ashington state, and dozens of processors in aryland and irginia.
et not everyone left with big bundles of oysters aturday.
verall, rumbles said, the  favors more state-based water quality initiatives and ``innovative'' programs to combat pollution, such as pollution credits, which can be traded among top-polluting industries.