t is as if the reefs have been bleached.
he scientists say this strength in the face of warming will not be enough to save the world's coral reefs, which are threatened by pollution, overfishing, tourism and other human activities.
ore than 58 percent of world coral reefs have been threatened by human pressure and weather change, said an press release issued on aturday by a world conservation meeting held here.
ut the new research, led by aker, suggests that heat-tolerant algae may move in to replace strains lost in bleaching events.
n 1998, an l ino global coral bleaching event caused deaths of many coral reefs, a disaster occurring only once in 1,000 years.
he study found as many as one-fifth of the world's coral reefs have been destroyed.
ore than 58 percent of the world's coral reefs are endangered because of pollution, the over-harvesting of reef fish and other human factors, the orld onservation nion () said riday.
bout 16 percent of global reefs had been damaged by the bleaching.
he conservation union  which produces a "red list" of the world's most endangered species  also warned the destruction of reefs would have a major impact on the lives of more than one billion people.
or example, she said, it could be that heat-tolerant algae strains devote more of their energy to reproducing and less to providing sustenance to their coral hosts.
aker said these findings, reported in the journal ature in ugust, suggested that when corals lost algae in a bleaching event, heat-tolerant algae could move in to replace them.
egional marine programme co-ordinator for outh and outheast sia with the  (orld onservation nion) in olombo, ri anka, erker amelander, said damage to the marine ecosystem could be "very, very serious."
 major problem would be a loss of fish, displaced by the waves from their habitat, and other forms of protein which depend on the reefs.
he report warned that the destruction of reefs would have a major impact on the lives of more than one billion people.
or example, according to a report issued this month by the lobal oral eef onitoring etwork, scientists do not know exactly what conditions must exist for corals to acquire new strains of algae.
or some time, scientists have predicted that the world's coral reefs will be among the first ecosystems to suffer devastating damage from global warming.
istory suggests that the coral bleaching and mortality associated with the severe l ino phenomenon of 1997-98 was a thousand-year event, according to the monitoring network's coral report.
ymbiont  "is becoming more common on reefs that are experiencing bleaching events," aker said.
ut, the report says, evidence strongly suggests that global warming will turn severe bleaching into "a regular event" by the middle of the century.
bout 65 percent of the ersian ulf's reefs have been destroyed, the report said.
amelander said many coral reefs in the ndian cean were just beginning to recover from damage caused by the changing water temperatures generated by the l ino weather pattern.
 more positive development is the recovery of about two-fifths of the reefs seriously damaged by an unprecedented coral "bleaching" from unusually warm waters in 1998.
"ith so many reefs endangered, efforts to save corals could be overlooked," arl ustaf undin, ead of the orld onservation nion () lobal arine rogram was quoted by the press release as saying.
eef-based activities, principally fishing and tourism, provide economic livelihoods for millions of others," said the  press release.
sing  analysis, they compared the algae populations at those three sites with algae strains in coral reefs in the ersian ulf, which are relatively tolerant of heat, and with other corals in the ed ea, where temperatures do not normally rise as high and where algae strains are less heat-tolerant.
"t will take a long time to recover."
he oil spill has blanketed coral reefs in the luanpi area, causing an ecological disaster that will take the sensitive ecosystem years from which to recover.
ow based in hode sland, ale said the tsunami may have caused lasting environmental damage that may take decades or longer to recover from.
cientists hursday said they expect marine life from shore to about a mile out to have suffered the worst damage.
wenty percent of the world's coral reefs ``have been effectively destroyed and show no immediate prospect of recovery.''
ext in terms of damage are reefs off outh and outheast sia, where 45 percent and 38 percent, respectively, have been destroyed.
"o even from a major event there can be recovery," he said, if overfishing, habitat destruction and other threats are mitigated.
" can definitely say there is damage in the area."
lso, nowlton said, it is not yet known whether corals colonized with new varieties of algae will grow as well as they once did with other strains.
iscarded utility poles were submerged in waters off anliao ort in the northern aiwan county of sinchu riday to create artificial reefs as part of the government's fishery resources conservation efforts.
 similar situation has been found in an undersea area to the east of reen sland, where the freighter icasso sank 12 years ago, heng said.
t will take hundreds of years to grow back," he said.
bout half the reefs that were left badly damaged after the 1997-98 l ino event have bounced back, aker said.
nly about 30 percent of the world's coral reefs are healthy, down from 41 percent two years ago, according to a study released onday that lists global warming as the top threat.
f so, he said, "some of the doom and gloom might not be as bad as had been suggested."
"he coral reef system might be totally destroyed.
n the aldives, dive operator orbert chmidt said the eastern part of the island was hit the worst, with dead coral and sand covering the runway at ulule nternational irport.
his week, dive operators and researchers began sending e-mails to the orldish enter in alaysia, an international fisheries research center, painting an early bleak picture of the region's treasured coastal waters.
ome reefs, however, are proving surprisingly resilient, researchers say, not because of qualities of the corals, but because of heat-tolerant algae that live with them.
hey resembled the reefs of the ed ea, aker said.
he scientists found that reefs in anama and enya, which had experienced unusually high water temperatures, had high proportions of a heat-tolerant strain called symbiont . y contrast, reefs off auritius, where waters remained cooler, had fewer symbiont  algae.
hese are only some of the conclusions of an exhaustive new report by 240 scientists in 98 countries, working under the auspices of the lobal oral eef onitoring etwork.
t noted that coral on many aribbean reefs have declined by up to 80 percent, and many reefs do not resemble the reefs of 30 years ago.
"his is a massive, massive erosion event," she said.
"ut there can't be recovery if we triple- and quadruple-whammy these reefs."
he  plans to release a detailed report on the state of the world's coral reefs next month.
amelander says in some cases mangroves, which protect the shore from erosion and often serve as nurseries for young fish, would also have been completel0 years," he said.
esearchers at lorida's arbor ranch ceanographic nstitution have discovered that this year's rash of hurricanes scoured damaging seaweed, known scientifically as macroalgae, from coral reefs off the lorida coast, though they warned it is likely to come back.
esides human impact, coral reefs are also threatened by global weather change.
  task force based in eneva will assess two things: environmental damage that threatens human health, and the toll on the ecological resources  many of which support tourism and the fishing industry.
reckage of the morgos, a reek freighter that ran aground and sank off the coast of enting at the southernmost tip of aiwan an. 14 is now "a slaughter hell" for coral in an area of ungkeng off enting, said heng ing-hsiu, ociety chairman and a researcher with cademia inica's nstitute of oology.
hen a tsunami passes, reef structures grind into each other causing extensive damage.
hey do know that in 1883, when the rakatoa volcano exploded and sent a giant tsunami washing over ndonesia, coral heads that weighed hundreds of tons were tossed hundreds of feet inland.
and animals may have had the same "sixth sense" to move to safety: ildlife officials in ri anka's ala ational ark said they have not seen evidence that many animals died, despite the preserve's closeness to the ocean.
owever, some biologists speculated that marine mammals such as whales and dolphins swimming near shore when the tsunami struck may have sensed the strange seas and headed for deeper waters, where the giant waves were barely noticeable.
he morgos, carrying 60,000 tons of iron ore, was heading for antong in mainland hina from ingapore when it developed mechanical problems and began to drift.
t least three officials were disciplined due to aftermath of that incident.
etired avy ice dmiral onrad autenbacher, a ommerce epartment undersecretary who heads the ational ceanic and tmospheric dministration, called reefs a global issue.
"he structures provide a foundation that is colonized by coral polyps and in time becomes thickly encrusted with living coral, providing an ecosystem in which marine life can thrive, " a  official said.
ohn urner, assistant secretary of state for oceans and international environmental and scientific affairs, called the report "a wake-up call" and said it would be circulated to .. diplomats overseas.
he administration's efforts so far to protect coral reefs include improving monitoring and satellite surveillance, agreeing to eneva-based treaty restrictions on international trade in coral reefs and passing out $10 million (euro7.4 million) in grants, autenbacher said.
embers of the aiwanese oral eef ociety environmental group appealed yet again riday to government agencies not to let the "morgos" pollution case go any further and see to it that the undersea wreckage is removed at the earliest possible date.
he reefs were constructed under a long-term cooperative program between the ouncil of griculture's ('s) ishery dministration and state-owned aiwan ower o. (aipower).
he union made the warning during its congress in angkok, which brings together scientists and experts from 181 countries to debate the escalating extinction crisis and form a conservation blueprint for the next four years.
ut the oceans  and their precious corals  cannot afford delay.
"f it were birds it would be 18th- or 19th-century science  who's living with whom, where," she said.
resident ush should make it a priority of his second term.
et despite the widespread agreement on the nature and severity of the problem, action has been slow.
he result is coral bereft of much of its power supply.
he studies basically show the same thing: eople are using the oceans in a fashion that can't be sustained, and, absent serious change across a range of human behaviors, the oceans will die off.
he living polyps that give coral reefs their color wither, usually leaving lifeless white skeleton reefs of calcium carbonate.
eth aley can be reached at bdaleyglobe.com
"aybe in ast frica where the waves weren't as high, but 'm not sure when you get a 40-foot wave a mangrove would have made a huge difference," said usi oser, research scientist for the ational enter for tmospheric esearch.
ll the corals they studied were colonized by ymbiodinium algae, a diverse genus whose various species look alike but react differently to heat.
ver the past three decades, aiwan has created a large number of artificial reefs made from discarded utility poles, decommissioned naval vessels and discarded tires at 100-plus designated areas along the coastline to enhance fishery resources.
n addition to enhancing fishery resources, the artificial reef areas have also become points of interest and create new businesses in such areas as deep-sea diving, leisure fishing and recreational scuba diving.
ince the freighter's sinking, its wreckage has continued to impair the growth of coral because of the sharp metal edges of the wreck, turning the area into a coral graveyard, heng claimed.
ontrary to previous speculation that the freighter's wreckage could become an undersea artificial fishery reef, he said, the ship has disintegrated in the strong currents and its debris has continued to spread, posing increasing threats to the coral.
hey do not even know if changes occur when corals recruit different algae from the water around them, or if something somehow changes the ratio of algae strains growing within them.
nd though symbiont  is widespread among the world's corals, nowlton said, scientists do not know whether all of them can support the strain.
n ri anka and hailand, coral damage is reported to be severe, and trees have crashed down onto reefs, ripping many of the corals, some hundreds of years old, apart.
"eefs need our help, but they're not going to go extinct," said live ilkinson, the study's lead author and coordinator of the lobal oral eef onitoring etwork.
"n the region as a whole  think we can expect very severe ecosystem effects," he said, adding the recovery process for coral reefs could take "decades to centuries".
"here is a huge natural cost, but what it is is still to be determined," said ynne ale, director of the global marine initiative for the ature onservancy, who worked in hailand's huket sland and ri anka for many years.
"asically, algae cells are lost from the coral host," he said.
"assive global bleaching mortality will not be a 1/1000 year event in the future, but a regular event," warned the release.
oth areas were hard hit by the tsunami.
hey provide food and shelter to fish and protect shores from erosion.
e said the findings were the first "real-world evidence" that corals might adapt to warming.
he aribbean has lost 80 to 98 percent of its elkhorn and staghorn coral, two of the region's most common species, the scientists said, suggesting the nited tates should look at listing them as endangered species.
n particular, they studied what happened to corals in relatively shallow waters off the acific coast of anama, and in the ndian cean off enya and auritius.
oral could also have been damaged by exposure to the air as water was sucked back from the shore before the tsunamis hit.
aker and his colleagues studied corals affected by l ino-outhern scillation events, natural disruptions of ocean currents that occur periodically and that can cause ocean temperatures to rise in one area or another.
ost of the reefs that have recovered are in the ndian cean, are part of the reat arrier eef off ustralia's coast or are in the western acific, particularly around alau.
yle ail, director of the izard sland esearch tation on ustralia's reat arrier eef, said damage to coral reefs from a tsunami would likely be similar to that from a cyclone.
ven in the higher diversity areas of outheast sia and the ndian cean, there are few encouraging signs for reefs for increasing human pressures.
 on riday launched a report named "2004 tatus of oral eefs of the orld" at the 3rd orld onservation onference, which is being held in angkok from ov. 17 to ov. 25.
ut this kind of adaptation may not be enough "to let corals off the hook," as nowlton of the cripps nstitution put it in an interview.
ut a combination of global warming, pollution, overfishing, diseases and other factors is ravaging reefs worldwide.
oral reefs are among the oldest and most diverse forms of life.
lready stressed from fishing and tourism, many of the reefs may be covered in mud, which can block sunlight that fish and other organisms below them need.
"eefs provide seafood for one billion people in sia alone, many of them from poor communities.
n huket sland, one popular beach was piled with dead staghorn coral, starfish, gulper eels, sea cucumbers, and sea grasses.
eanwhile, corals, which only grow a fraction of an inch each year, may be excreting mucus as a defensive mechanism against the mud  "expensive in terms of energy (that) weakens the coral," e-mailed arco oordeloos of the orldish enter.
ut if the findings hold up, "they essentially buy us time" to address those issues, said ndrew . aker of the arine rogram of the ildlife onservation ociety, who led the new work.
t may even be possible that heat-related episodes of coral bleaching, which had been viewed as ominous previews of mass coral death to come, could allow these robust algae to spread, leaving corals better able to survive in a warmer world.
f something isn't done soon, it will be too late for many reefs to recover.
hile ustralian and acific reefs remain relatively healthy, the report documents devastating declines elsewhere, including the aribbean region, where coral cover on many reefs has declined by up to 80 percent.
"t is so hard to say in brief, but the level of devastation of coastal areas by the disaster is obvious," director of onservation nternational in the ndonesian resort island of ali, etut arjana utra, said.
eaches around outh sia devastated by tsunamis could be restored to their former glory within a few years, but the marine life through which the huge waves passed could take centuries to recover, experts said.
estruction or threats to 70 percent of the coral reefs represent a sharp rise from 59 percent in the last study in 2002.
owever, "the extreme events of 1998 will become more common in the next 50 years," with increasing sea surface temperatures and other factors.
o evidence of coral recovery since 1998 is encouraging, the report says.
oral reefs, mangroves, fish and other marine life had been damaged by the tsunamis which rose out of the ndian cean on unday, triggered by a massive earthquake near the ndonesian island of umatra.
nother half are damaged but could be saved, it said.
fter global warming _ blamed for higher water temperatures and carbon dioxide concentrations _ threats to the reefs include coral disease, overfishing, coastal development and pollution runoff from land-based sources.
ustralia this year put as much as a third of both its reat arrier eef and ingaloo eef marine park off limits to fishing.
t the beginning of its one-week meeting in angkok,  declared a red list of more than 15,000 species facing extinction if no effective conservation measures are taken.
"nce again, human impacts are to blame for the depletion of reefs," the union said in a statement, adding that climate change and the encroachment of introduced species such as starfish were also major factors.
y comparison, he said, coral reefs near enghu sland are found to be the most healthy, with coral coverage rate totaling nearly 100 percent.
``o one has ever had the chance to study the impacts of natural phenomena like hurricanes on reefs under siege from these harmful algae blooms that we believe are triggered by humans.''
t ran aground 1.6 km off the coast of luanpi, aiwan's southernmost tip, before sinking.
ith underground electrical wiring becoming a general trend in recent years, aipower has donated many waste cement utility poles for the creation of more than 10,000 artificial reefs in 79 coastal regions, including aoyuan ounty's ungan, sinchun ounty's anliao, aichung ounty's uchi, hanghua ounty's angkung and ualien ounty's enliao, for conservation of fishery resources and other marine life.
 petition from an environmental group, the enter for iological iversity, to do that is being considered by the ush administration.
"t is not just a nice thing from an environmental perspective," autenbacher said.
 decision is expected by the end of 2005, autenbacher said.
ut the hurricanes did not end the problem.
"e don't know if it's the algae leaving a sick coral colony or a coral ejecting a defunct algae.
hile attention is clearly focused on the rising human toll of the tragedy, some dive operators and marine biologists are reporting that from ri anka to hailand corals are suffocating under layers of mud, heaps of rotten fish, are clogging beachfronts, and rare turtle nesting sites have been washed out to sea.
lgae and corals live in a symbiotic relationship.
ut this relationship can falter when ocean water warms, aker said.
nd the beaches of ri anka, the ndaman and icobar islands, and other countries hit by the tsunami host prime nesting spots for some of the world's rarest sea turtles, such as leatherbacks that return to the same spot year after year to lay eggs.
nswers to those questions await more research, and she said the study of corals was still developing.
"ou have a region where the marine ecosystem is stressed and degraded as it is," he told .
oral polyps absorb and shelter the algae, and as the algae photosynthesize they produce sugars that the corals use for energy.
hile covering less than 1 percent of the earth's surface, they help drive the food chains and economies of many on the planet, with $375 billion (euro279 billion) in economic benefits globally, according to the study by 240 scientists in 96 countries.
"s long as poverty, population growth and lack of alternative livelihoods keep people dependent on already depleted reef resources, the coral reefs of outh sia will continue to degrade," the union's outh sia marine coordinator, erker amelander, said.
nd in 1964, when a tsunami hit laska, news reports noted that baby salmon were killed, although it's unclear how many.
cientists don't have comprehensive historical data about marine damage that tsunamis can cause, especially one of this magnitude.
he nited ations hursday set aside $1 million to assess environmental damage caused by this week's devastating tsunami, as reports of destroyed coral reefs and uprooted mangrove forests began trickling in.
ome scientists this week said human activity in the coastal zone contributed to the immense damage on shore  such as building tourist hotels too close to the water and tearing out mangrove forests to put in shrimp aquaculture farms throughout sia.
hat means, in theory, that there is only a 1-in-1,000 chance that similar effects would be seen in a given year.
``his is a break, not a solution for the reefs,'' apointe said.
n serious cases recovery would be slow as there would be fewer larval animals to repopulate the coral.
he ndian cean region, with its aqua, shallow seas, hosts some of the most beloved and famous coral reefs in the world that support scores of fish species found nowhere else.
``his is uncharted territory,'' said arbor ranch marine ecologist rian apointe.
he scientists were looking for evidence that the algae blooms are caused by human-generated runoff in the waterways, including sewage and agricultural waste.
angroves are critical nurseries for many of these fish.
o far, there is no indication the administration is contemplating the needed dramatic shifts in policy.
oral reefs, in addition to being breathtakingly beautiful, are among the cradles of life on arth  hotbeds of biodiversity critical to sustaining oceanic health.
"eefs provide seafood for one billiocautioned.
he health of the reefs could in turn dramatically affect the size of fish populations which rely on them for their habitat.
he findings are "definitely good news," said ancy nowlton, an expert on corals who directs the enter for arine iodiversity and onservation of the cripps nstitution of ceanography at the niversity of alifornia, an iego.
o good news on the global warming front is very welcome."
he ocean's seagrass bed and mangrove ecosystem would also be affected, utra said, but it is the reefs that bore the brunt of the destruction.
ut others say that while the lack of mangrove forests probably exacerbated the destruction, it's unlikely that they would have slowed the tsunami's enormous volume of water.
"ome people would argue that global climate change is their biggest long-term threat," nowlton said, "and it's the one we have the least ability to do anything about.
he administration is also considering creating a national marine sanctuary and banning commercial fishing in the orthwestern awaiian slands to protect the chain's delicate reefs.
arther south, scientists found that serious concentrations of a blue-green algae known as cyanobacterium are killing corals and other reef organisms.
till, he said, it's crucial to "raise the level of political will" to help reefs around the world.
"any fish washed ashore, trees that were knocked down (smashed) into the reefs," ichiru ain, a researcher who was conducting a reef survey at u o urin, a popular dive spot in hailand, when the tsunami struck, said in an e-mail.
 officials said the artificial reefs not only function to prevent the deterioration of fishing grounds but also help increase fish stocks.
"e know they're degrading fast, we know what the problems are, we know how to fix them," ilkinson said at news conference by the wiss-based orld orldlife und.
ll 25 crew members were rescued, but the ship later broke in two and an estimated 1,150 tons of fuel oil gushed out of the vessel and blanketed coral reefs in the luanpi area.
he dire threat to the world's  and merica's  oceans is hardly a surprise, and it isn't limited to coral reefs either.
oordeloos said fish populations have probably been damaged, too, although it's far too early to get a complete picture.
he disaster has left more than 120,000 people dead and up to five million displaced in the region, with ndonesia, hailand, ndia and ri anka the worst affected countries.
efore the hurricanes struck, the scientists, funded by the nvironmental rotection gency and the state of lorida, began examining reefs stretching about 130 miles from ort ierce to north of iami.
``nless we can get a clear understanding of what drives these blooms and control the culprits, it's going to be more of the same, and we'll risk losing this incredible ecological and economic resource.''
n south sia, over 60 percent of the reefs were killed during the 1998 mass bleaching, and today almost half of the reefs remain dead.
he group suspended its activity for two months while hurricanes rances and eanne pounded the region; when they returned, they found that reefs in northern alm each ounty had been scoured clean of macroalgae such as seaweed.
he harmful debris will not disappear by itself and it cannot be "digested" by the sea, heng argued, adding that the only option is to have it removed before more coral, the ecological system and aiwan's tourism resources are further compromised.
n additional 24 percent ``are under imminent risk of collapse through human pressures,'' and an additional 26 percent ``are under a longer term threat of collapse.''
n opportunity to begin doing so is coming; the administration by law has to respond by ec. 20 to the recommendations of the .. ommission on cean olicy, which ongress created in 2000 to examine merica's policy toward its coastal waters.
 major problem would be the amount of silt, sand and organic matter churned into the water which would then "smother" vegetation and marine life.
e added that after a series of observations, it has been found that in a 2 km by 500 meter coral reef area near ungkeng, enting, coral coverage rate has continued to drop.
wo major task forces have recently documented the grave ecological conditions of merica's coastal waters.
long with the related issue of climate change, this is the preeminent environmental issue of our time.