Hundreds of thousands of Lebanese mourners gathered at the Mohamed Al Amin Mosque in the capital Beirut on Wednesday to pay last tribute to former Prime Minister Rafik al-Hariri killed in a suicide car bombing on Monday.
Opposition leaders on Monday held Lebanese and Syrian governments responsible for the assassination of former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri, demanded Syrian troops withdraw from Lebanon within the next three months and called on the international community to intervene to help "this captive nation."
Wailing and shouting, hundreds of thousands of mourners made their way in a somber but angry procession Wednesday from the home of former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri to his burial place in the grounds of an unfinished mosque that was one of his favorite reconstruction projects.
Earlier in the day, Hariri was killed in a powerful explosion in the Lebanese capital of Beirut.
On Monday, Hariri and eight other people were killed in a huge explosion, which occurred as Hariri's motorcade was passing by in the seafront area of the Lebanese capital Beirut.
He was Rafik Hariri, a former and a future prime minister of Lebanon.
Saudi Arabia on Tuesday rejected a French demand for an international investigation into the assassination of former Lebanese Prime Minister Rafik Hariri, saying Lebanon is an independent country.
It also called for a three-day strike and demanded an international commission to investigate the assassination "in light of the lack of confidence of the Lebanese in this government."
Hariri, 60, a Sunni Muslim, was killed in a powerful explosion in the Lebanese capital of Beirut earlier in the day.
The Lebanese interior minister said on Tuesday that initial indications showed that former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri was killed in a suicide car bombing.
Former Lebanese Prime Minister Rafik Hariri was killed in a powerful explosion in central Beirut on Monday, Lebanese officials and medical sources said.
French President Jacques Chirac was due to arrive in Beirut on Wednesday to present his condolences to the family of Hariri but appeared unlikely to attend the funeral in time.
The group, Support and Jihad in Syria and Lebanon, claimed in a video broadcast on Al-Jazeera television that it had carried out the bombing, saying it was a suicide operation to avenge the death of "its brothers" in Saudi Arabia.
The red flags of the Druse leader Walid Jumblatt's Socialist Party and the green cedar flags of the Phalangist Party, also enemies in the war, fluttered together in the sea of people that descended into the funeral grounds in front of the unfinished Amin Mosque.
Ambulances carrying the coffin of Hariri and six of his bodyguards and a paramedic who were also killed in the blast, were brought to a halt at the edge of the square.
A previously unknown Islamic group on Monday claimed responsibility for an earlier killing of former Lebanese Prime Minister Rafik Hariri due to his ties with Saudi Arabia, the Qatar-based al-Jazeera TV channel reported.
The more the Syrians experience the fresh air of Lebanon, the more they will want it in Syria.
Hariri, a popular figure to many in Lebanon and a central figure in reconstructing the country after a devastating 15-year civil war, was assassinated on Monday in an explosion that many here believe was the work of Syria, whose forces have played a dominant role in Lebanon since the 1970s.
It begins in Damascus and passes through the Lebanese presidential palace in Baabda, the Lebanese government and the Lebanese intelligence apparatus," former Economy Minister Marwan Hamadeh, who was seriously hurt in an October car bombing that killed his driver, was quoted on LBC television as saying.
Syrian President Bashar al-Assad on Monday condemned a blast which killed former Lebanese Prime Minister Rafik Hariri as "horrible terrorist act," the official SANA news agency reported.
Hariri, at least five bodyguards and four other people were killed in a massive bombing that blasted his motorcade on a Beirut seafront street earlier Monday.
"The Lebanese people will be the protectors of the fairness of the investigation, especially if this case is dealt with the required transparency," Saud said.
The crowd began massing quietly in front of Rafik Hariri's mansion in the early dawn hours Wednesday as Lebanon prepared to bury him and the six bodyguards who were killed with him in a bomb blast on Monday.
Over the years, Hariri became more and more concerned with Syrian influence in Lebanon, a product of Syria's military and intelligence presence left over from the war.
In Paris, French Foreign Ministry spokesman Herve Ladsous said the U.N. Security Council was working on a demand that the Lebanese government bring to justice those responsible for the assassination of Hariri.
Watching the ceremony from the steps of the mosque, outside the prayer area, were Hariri's two daughters and his sister, who is also a member of Parliament.
A friend of mine was killed in Beirut Monday in a massive car bomb attack.
I said that I thought that over time, it will be the reverse: Syria will become more like Lebanon.
It was too early to say who killed Hariri who resigned as prime minister last October though oppositions held Syria and its allied Lebanese government responsible for Hariri's murder.
But Hariri's supporters have accused Syria and the Lebanese government of orchestrating the assassination.
The family also said it did not want a state funeral but one that the people of Lebanon could attend.
"Assad condemned the horrible terrorist act that claimed lives of a number of Lebanese people, notably former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri," SANA said.
They came from throughout the country in an emotional and politically charged tribute to Hariri, the former prime minister, billionaire developer and architect of Lebanon's revival from a devastating 15-year civil war.
In September, Hariri was known to have opposed the Syrian-imposed three-year extension in the length of the term for Lebanon's president.
Hariri was buried in the unfinished mosque which he had financed after the mass funeral procession escorting an ambulance carrying Hariri's coffin covered with national flag marched through the main streets to the mosque in central Beirut.
Hariri, who came to office first in 1992 and headed five governments over 12 years, resigned last October.
The success of those winds will not come from the outside but from Arabs of vision and optimism, men and women like Rafik Hariri.
Syrian President Bashar Assad condemned the assassination as "a horrible criminal action" and offered his country's condolences and support to Hariri's family and Lebanon at large.
Walid Eido, a member of Hariri's parliamentary bloc, also blamed Lebanese authorities, saying: "This government is responsible for the killing of Rafik Hariri."
Hariri and the other victims were then laid to rest in the grounds of the new mosque.
When I first met Rafik nearly 20 years ago, he had been spending the war years outside his native Lebanon, making friends and a fortune in Saudi Arabia.
He was a billionaire, and more important, a philanthropist.
Hariri had many business interests in Saudi Arabia, where he made his fortune in construction, and was a close friend of the Saudi royal family.
Hariri was important as a symbol of Lebanon to the outside world.
Later, at her home, Hariri's wife, Nazik, met President Jacques Chirac of France, a close friend of the ex-prime minister, who had come to pay his condolences.
Earlier Tuesday, French President Jacques Chirac, a friend of Hariri, demanded an international investigation, saying the slain man represented "the indefatigable will of independence, freedom and democracy" for Lebanon.
Other opponents of Syrian involvement in Lebanese affairs also cast blame on Damascus and its allies within the Lebanese government.
At the Hariri family's urging, Lebanon's pro-Syrian president, Emile Lahoud, stayed away from the funeral, but hundreds of women, breaking with Islamic tradition, joined in the march.
Eido said his bloc would not participate in any meetings that include government opponents of Hariri and urged the government to keep away from Hariri's funeral.
As a result the procession found it difficult to enter and did not arrive in time for the regular noonday prayers at the massive Mohammed Amine mosque, an impressive building with four minarets that is to replace a mosque destroyed in the civil war.
Lebanon has also rejected calls for an international investigation.
The rites were organized by the Hariri family, which refused a state funeral to underscore its anger at the government.
The family believes that Hariri's death was caused in part by the government's failure to provide security, and at their request no government officials attended the funeral.
Hariri, 60, died on Monday when his motorcade was blown up by a suicide car bomber in western Beirut seafront.
Hariri wan not perfect -- no human is.
Lebanon has lost a leader, a larger-than-life figure who did much good.
Hariri had an Atlanta connection, quietly coming each year to Emory Medical Center for a checkup.
He was sometimes called a "bulldozer" for his power to push through problems, but a ruined country needed a bulldozer to clear away the debris.
John H. Kelly was assistant secretary of state for the Near East and South Asia from 1989 to 1991.
He asked whether it would have been better to live in ruins.
Last week she hosted a conference in Beirut for women in politics from all over the Middle East.
Some climbed lampposts while others hung from balconies, trying to catch a glimpse of the ambulance carrying his coffin, often breaking into wails as they chanted "There is no God but God" and "Hariri is loved by God."
He never uttered an uncomplimentary word about the Syrian leadership.
I saw Hariri each time I visited Beirut, whether he was in office or out.
Speaking to reporters, Suleiman Franjieh said that a car carrying explosives approached Hariri's convoy before detonation.
Our first conversations were about how to bring peace between Israel and the Arabs.
Among foreign dignitaries at the funeral were EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana, US Assistant Secretary of State William Burns and Arab League Secretary-General Amr Moussa as well as other Arab and European ministers.
Many Christians, Muslims and Druse, once bitter enemies, walked side by side.
It seemed that the most far-reaching effect of the assassination would be a fundamental change in the relationship between Lebanon and Syria, with a newly emboldened opposition movement renewing calls for Syria's withdrawal.
It said Hariri was targeted because "he was an agent" for Saudi Arabia.
Hariri was important to Lebanon as a politician and a symbol.
A successful businessman, a kind benefactor, Hariri was a practicing and observant Sunni Muslim who was at home in Beirut, Saudi Arabia, New York and Paris.
Hariri, 60, a Sunni Muslim, resigned last October.
Hariri, 60, a Sunni Muslim, resigned last October.
Hariri, 60, a Sunni Muslim, resigned last October.
Hariri was prime minister for 10 of the 14 years since Lebanon's 15-year war ended in 1990.
It appeared to be the biggest bomb in the city since Lebanon's civil war ended in 1990.
The Islamic call to prayer was mixed with sounds of church bells and mourners chanting slogans of reverence for the former prime minister.
"Syria as a government and people announces support to sisterly Lebanon during those dangerous situations and offers condolences to Mr. Rafik Hariri and other victims' families," Assad was quoted as saying.
The bombing has also led to renewed international pressure led by the US and France for Syria to withdraw its 14,000 troops from neighboring Lebanon.
The explosion, apparently caused by a car bomb, occurred around 1:00 p.m. (1100 GMT), when Hariri's motorcade of four black limousines escorted by jeeps was passing by in the seafront area of the capital.
He came to office first in 1992 and headed five governments over 12 years.
He came to office first in 1992 and headed five governments over 12 years.
He came to office first in 1992 and headed five governments over 12 years.
Through his foundation and with his money, more than 30,000 young Lebanese men and women received university educations in the United States, Europe and Lebanon.
Opposition politicians and the United States have strongly suggested Syria had a hand in the bombing of Hariri's motorcade.
Eventually, well over 100,000 marched down streets festooned with Lebanese flags, shouting "Syria Out" in protest of the dominant role Syria's forces have played in the country since the 1970s.
Hariri died at American University Hospital, while former Minister of Justice Samir al-Jisr and former Minister of Economy and Trade Basil Fuleihan, who were traveling in Hariri's convoy, survived the blast.
Seven of the coffins were first placed on the ground, and that of Hariri, draped in a red, white and green Lebanese flag, was passed overhead by the mourners.
Although the crowd's sorrow was mixed with anger, there was no tension in the air, and the procession was conducted in an orderly way.
Hariri was assassinated in a huge bomb blast Monday, which also killed 16 other people and injured about 120.
Out of his death comes a stronger need to defend the fresh air of Lebanon.
As the years passed he became more experienced, polished and proficient.
It is the Syrian system that will change.
This is a crime against the Lebanese people and a crime against Lebanon and cannot be justified under any pretext," Saud said.
Hariri's eldest son, Bahaa, asked for calm from the wailing crowd so that prayers for the dead could be read, but many of the mourners were too emotional and did not join in the prayers.
Hariri was known to be a friend of French President Jacques Chirac and had been to Washington to meet with President Bush on several occasions.
The opposition statement called for the resignation of Prime Minister Omar Karami's Cabinet, "which has lost its popular local and international credibility."
Barnier said France would continue to work toward achieving its demand for an international investigation.
Syria has been under international pressure to withdraw its troops from Lebanon and not to interfere in Lebanon's internal affairs.
"For the sake of our Mujahideen (fighters) brothers in Saudi Arabia ... we decided to implement the just execution of those who support this regime," one man said on a tape aired by al-Jazeera.
His friends included the Saudi royal family.
The group claimed itself as the Group for Victory and Holy War in the Levant.
In the press conference, Saud dismissed a responsibility claim by a previously unknown group for Hariri's assassination as "ridiculous."
When I first met him, I thought that Rafik was a talented man and a raw politician.
Last September, the United States and France joined together in the United Nations Security Council to pass Resolution 1559, calling for free elections and the withdrawal of all foreign forces (read Syria) from Lebanon.
"This is ridiculous talk and shouldn't be answered.
He said that the incident was still under investigation.
"Responsibility for this ugly crime is known.
Syria has denied any involvement in the bombing.
The procession of mourners, which was larger than expected, included Hariri's three sons, Bahaa, Saadeldine and Ayman, and, in a break with Islamic tradition, hundreds of weeping women.
His opponents accused him of saddling the country with debt in financing the reconstruction.
Assad, whose country still maintains about 14,000 troops in Lebanon, called on the Lebanese to maintain national unity against those who seek to arouse disputes and partition in the country, SANA added.
In recent weeks he was working on a comeback in the parliamentary elections scheduled for May.
The statement demanded the "full withdrawal" of Syrian troops before the elections, which by law should take place in April and May although no date has been set.
"We call upon the international community to shoulder its responsibility toward Lebanon, the captive nation," said the statement, read by legislator Bassem Sabei, a member of Hariri's parliamentary bloc.
At least eight others were also killed, including some of Hariri's bodyguards.
Crowds had begun jamming the streets in Martyr's Square in downtown Beirut since 9:30 a.m.
"Brothers, we must all grieve together," one imam told the mourners.
Part of his maneuvers included potentially making common cause with the Lebanese politicians who are openly demanding that the Syrian forces get out of Lebanon.
More than anyone else, he was responsible for the rebuilding of Beirut and the country's infrastructure.
I told him that many of my Lebanese friends were worried that Lebanon would become more like Syria, with free speech stifled.
Saudi Foreign Minister Prince Saud al-Faisal, speaking at a joint press conference with French Foreign Minister Michel Barnier, said: "Lebanon is an independent country and its judiciary is independent."
There are fresh winds blowing through all of the Arab world, of elections and education and a new role for women.
"We hold the Lebanese authority and the Syrian authority, being the authority of tutelage in Lebanon, responsible for this crime and other similar crimes," said a statement after an opposition meeting held Monday night at the late leader's house in Beirut.
Hariri's sister, Bahia, chairs the Education Committee in the Lebanese Parliament.
walked for more than two hours in an emotional but orderly manner from Hariri's home to Martyr's Square.
And although police officials provided security, there were no Lebanese soldiers to be seen.
During one such visit we discussed the concern of many over Syria.
Every Syrian who comes to Beirut feels as if he has come from a smoke-filled room to a place with fresh air.
The meandering two-hour march through the streets became as much a show of Lebanon's struggle for unity as an occasion for mourning.
His foundation was already helping young people head off to college.
"If everything goes well, this declaration should be finalized in the day and adopted" Tuesday, Ladsous said.
Lebanese from all walks of life and religious groups, many waving Lebanese flags and posters saying "Syria Out!"
He resigned the prime ministry shortly thereafter.
Rafik Hariri was the antithesis of Osama bin Laden.
He learned to campaign well in remarkably lively parliamentary elections.
Hariri had joined a chorus of objection to interference in Lebanon's internal affairs.
Security forces sealed off the scene, where a big crater was gouged by the explosion.