he apanese government is committed to increase its aid for tsunami-hit ceh and orth umatra provinces to 146 million  dollars, apanese mbassador to ndonesia utaka imura said on onday.
apan has provided some 500 million  dollar fund for tsunami- affected countries including ndonesia, the aldives and ri anka.
ustralian rime inister ohn oward said ednesday that his country would provide 1 billion ustralian dollars (about 764 million  dollars) in loans and grants to assist ndonesia in its rebuilding after the ec. 26 earthquake-tsunami disaster.
zbekistan on onday sent a plane with 35 metric tons (39 short tons) of humanitarian aid to tsunami-hit ndonesia, the oreign inistry said.
n extremely powerful earthquake and the tsunami that followed devastated many parts of orth umatra and ceh on ec. 26 last year, killing more than 100,000 people there.
angladesh would airlift and ship 1, 000 metric tons of high energy biscuits () for the tsunami victims of ndonesia and ri anka this week.
he sources said as part of the planned 1,000 metric tons of , the government is contemplating of sending several hundred tons of  to ri anka, ndonesia and the aldives in the coming weeks.
his is the second batch of relief goods hina has sent to the tsunami-hit countries in south and southeast sian countries.
he lyushin-76 cargo plane headed for edan, the main city on ndonesia's umatra island, one of the areas hardest hit by the ec. 26 tsunami, the ministry said in a statement.
ndonesia's official earthquake and tsunami death toll rose by more than 100 people ednesday to 94,200, the health ministry said.
he ambassador said that his government would conduct a survey this week in ceh province in order to find out what is the most needed for survivors in the tsunami-hit areas.
angladesh has already sent medicines and other relief goods for the tsunami victims in ri anka and the aldives.
early 500,000 people were made homeless after tsunami swept ceh province, in ndonesia on ec. 26, ministry of information and communication said on ednesday.
t least 95,000 people were killed by the tsunami in ndonesia.
e also said that the government of apan committed to involving in long-term reconstruction and rehabilitation projects in the provinces of ceh and orth umatra.
fficials said the government was providing extensive support to the  for sending the relief to the tsunami victims.
he killer tsunami that was touched off by an 8.7-magnitude earthquake off ndonesia's umatra island on ec. 26, has climbed to over 145,000 so far, with over 90,000 deaths reported in ndonesia.
he hinese team arrived in edan, capital of orth umatra, ndonesia, at 05:10 a.m. local time by a chartered plane.
his was the biggest single aid package in ustralia's history, oward told a press conference in akarta.
alf of the assistance will be in the form of grants for short term relief and the remainder in loans for long term reconstruction, oward said.
he two batches of relief goods, worth 21.63 million yuan (2.62 million  dollars), are mainly tents, blankets, sheets and food that are badly needed by the people affected by the tsunami.
hey will leave for ceh rovince later in the day.
he official news agency  onday quoted the sources at the epartment of elief and ehabilitation as saying that the nited ations orld ood rogram () would airlift a part of the food to umatra immediately after availability of aircraft and that the rest would be shipped for ri anka in the next couple of days.
 oeing 747 plane carrying 50 tons of relief goods left uangzhou in south hina for tsunami- stricken ndonesia hursday, said an official of the inistry of ommerce.
he first batch of 100-ton cargoes was airlifted to olombo, capital of ri anka, ednesday morning.
 powerful earthquake of 8.7 degrees on ichter scale shocked many parts of the provinces of orth umatra and ceh.
he ministry, which has said it expects the number of dead on hardest-hit umatra island to top 100,000, had not increased its count since onday, when it jumped by 14,000 to 94,081.
he destination is edan, capital of orth umatra, ndonesia, according to the hina outhern irlines that operates the cargo flight.
umatra is the focus of a massive international aid effort, with foreign militaries led by the nited tates flying in assistance since the magnitude 9.0 quake struck on ec. 26.
he official of the ministry said that at least 476,619 people were refugees, and the figure could increase as there were still many others uncounted by the officials.
n advance team comprising some 20 personnel will leave apan later uesday to visit ndonesia, hailand and alaysia to collect first-hand information on what the reo sent nearly 120 civilian emergency workers to tsunami-hit countries.
ndonesia got 130 million  dollars at the beginning and now the figure is 146 million  dollar, imura told reporters at the tate alace.
 hinese quake rescue team arrived in tsunami-ravaged ndonesia early riday to help emergency aid efforts there.
"he meeting will be to discuss the handling of the impact of the earthquake and the tsunami," assan irayuda said.
apan on uesday put its army, air force and navy on standby to provide assistance to survivors of sia's tsunami disaster, with most of their work expected to be in worst-hit ndonesia.
ndonesia's foreign minister on riday announced his country will host a anuary 6 summit of world leaders to discuss the aftermath of sia's devastating natural disaster.
"his is a historic step in ndonesian-ustralian relations in the wake of this terrible natural disaster," oward said.
he aid includes medicines, tents, food, two off-road vehicles, a motor boat, field kitchens, drinking water and helicopter parts.
e said that the conference will invite 23 countries, including the 10 member states of the ssociation of outheast sian ations and four major international organisations.
lanes from this entral sian nation are also helping deliver aid from enmark and witzerland, the oreign inistry said.
 second plane with an additional 16 metric tons (18 short tons) of aid was to depart onday evening.
t was the biggest earthquake anywhere in the world for 40 years and unleashed a tsunami that slammed into coastal communities from southern sia to frica killing nearly 150,000 in 11 nations.