hina's tate nvironmental rotection dministration () said here on ednesday that the onghua iver in northeast hina suffered a major water pollution incident owing to the explosion of a petrochemical plant at the upper reaches.
urrently, the water supply has been cut off in arbin, capital of northeast hina's eilongjiang rovince, as the city's water source, onghua iver, has been heavily polluted.
he front of the polluted water of onghua iver in northeast hina reached arbin, capital of eilongjiang rovince, on early hursday morning, local environment authority said.
he onghua iver suffered a major water pollution incident as a result of an explosion on ov. 13 at a petrochemical plant in ilin rovince, where the river originates.
e said the polluted water in the onghua iver, which reached eilongjiang provincial capital arbin on hursday morning, is expected to flow into the eilongjiang iver (called the mur iver in ussia) on the ino-ussian border in around 14 days judging from the current flow speed.
iu said hina was very concerned about possible hazards to ussia and has informed its neighbor several times of the pollution.
hina has informed ussia of the water pollution situation in the country's northeastern onghua iver, hinese oreign inistry spokesman iu ianchao said here on hursday.
wo reservoirs on the onghua iver on hursday reinforced water discharge to dilute a massive slick of chemical pollutants floating through this capital of northeast hina's eilongjiang.
he onghua iver, a tributary of the eilongjiang iver which is called the mur when it crosses the border, is contaminated by benzene due to a massive petrochemical plant explosion on ovember 13.
 petrochemical plant blast that occurred two weeks ago spilled large amount of benzene liquids into the onghua iver, resulting in heavy pollution in the section of arbin, capital of the eilongjiang province.
 major chemical explosion at ilin etrochemical ompany 380 kilometers up the onghua river on ovember 13 had sent massive amounts of benzene into the waterway.
he ov. 13 blast in ilin, a city in ilin province, caused massive amounts of benzene, a toxic, flammable liquid to flow into the onghua iver.
xperts estimate that around 100 tons of pollutants containing benzene has flown into the onghua iver, caused by a ov. 13 explosion at an upstream chemical plant of the ilin etrochemical ompany under the hina ational etroleum orp.
hina and ussia have both pledged to cooperate closely to handle the pollution of the onghua iver in northeast hina's eilongjiang rovince, said hinese oreign inistry spokesman iu ianchao here hursday.
"hina is very concerned about the possible hazards to ussia and has informed its neighbor several times of the pollution," oreign inistry spokesman iu ianchao said at a press conference.
 spokesman for the eilongjiang provincial government said that the poisonous organic substances, mainly high-density benzene and nitrobenzene flowing down the onghua iver, will arrive in this provincial capital early hursday.
onghua iver will carry poisonous substances to arbin, a major city in northeast hina, at round 5:00 a.m. hursday, an official said at a press conference ednesday afternoon.
"fter the explosion at the ilin etrochemical ompany under hina ational etroleum orporation, our observation showed pollutants containing benzene had flown into the onghua iver and caused water pollution," said an official with .
  hina pledged on hursday it will try its utmost to minimize the impact of northeast hina's onghua iver pollution on the neighboring ussia, including intensifying monitoring and water quality control measures.
hang ijun, deputy director general of  said hina would keep ussia informed at all times about the monitoring results of the polluted stretches of onghua iver.
t another press conference hursday, a senior official with hina's tate nvironmental rotection dministration () said the hinese side will keep informing the ussian side of what it has learnt from our monitoring.
ince the river was contaminated in a chemical plant explosion in the neighboring ilin rovince on ovember 13, the benzene and nitrobenzene density in the water is declining gradually after days of sedimentation and adsorption, and the arbin city government has added a large amount of active carbon powders into the river to help clean up the water.
he blast at the ilin etroleum and hemical ompany, which is located by the bank of the onghua iver, set off a series of explosions that leveled two of the plant's fuel towers where highly flammable gas benzene was being processed on ov. 13.
hinese oreign inistry spokesman iu ianchao said in eijing on hursday that hina has informed ussia of the water pollution situation in the river, a tributary of the eilong iver (called mur iver in ussia) on the border between the ussian far east and hina.
"e will be very clear about who's responsible," hang ijun, deputy director of the tate nvironmental rotection dministration, said at a press conference.
he  confirmed the "major pollution" of the onghua iver on ednesday.
e said ilin had quickly blocked entry of the pollutants into the river and discharged water from a reservoir to dilute pollutants in the river.
enzene-like organic pollutants, harmful to human health, had flown into the river after the blast, with the swath of polluted water stretching about 80 kilometers by ov. 21.
ussia expressed appreciation of hina's information, said iu, adding that hina will further strengthen the monitoring of the pollution situation and the level of pollutants in the river.
he 80-kilometer-long (50-mile-long) swathe of chemicals moved downstream into arbin, a city of 3.8 million people in neighboring eilongjiang province, on hursday, prompting officials to shut down water supplies.
"t is the chemical plant of the  in ilin province."
arbin, which is under a 4-day water supply cut-off, has taken measures to ensure public safety and a safe drinking water supply.
udging from the current flowing speed, it would take four days for the polluted block to flow out of the urban area of arbin, where tap water supply has been suspended.
he toxic benzene-contaminated water, flowing down from the upper reaches of onghua, arrived at the local water supply inlet at about 5 a.m., and has now entered river sections across the city's urban areas, according to the eilongjiang provincial environment protection bureau.
s the public has been informed timely, no human being has been harmed, said the  official.
n 80-kilometer chemical slick has been slowly moving downstream along the onghua iver and reached arbin on hursday morning.
hina shut down 2,682 companies discharging liquid waste among 420,000 inspected between last ay and eptember, hang ijun, deputy director of the tate nvironmental rotection dministration() told a press conference held here hursday.
 top official with hina's environmental watchdog said hursday that the company overseeing a chemical plant where an explosion spewed lethal chemicals into a river in the country's northeast should be held responsible for the pollution.
hang did not give any more details but said investigators were looking into criminal responsibility.
y ian ulei, ang ingzhong and ang iangang
hinese leaders have shown keen concern over the incident.
ater supplies and active carbon used to purify water are being shipped continuously to the affected areas.
he discharging move was made with the approval by the tate lood ontrol and rought elief eadquarters.
ithin this period, hina put 23,000 cases on file, closed 2,682 companies and asked 1,750 to stop production for treatment.
163 people responsible for major environment pollution events received punishment, hang said.
uo inlong, a monitor at the river, told inhua that the water pollution can not be distinguished by sight and there is no irritating smell emanating from the pollution.
he river is the main source of drinking water supply to arbin, a city of more than 3 million people.
hina is now making every effort to strengthen the monitoring and control of water quality of the onghua iver with the hope of minimizing the possible hazards, iu said.
hina will inform ussia at any moment of the latest situation, to enable the latter to make quick and timely responses, the spokesman said.
e said the pollutant strip will flow out of arbin aturday morning.
everal river monitoring stations reported that benzene density in the front strip of the pollutants was 28.56 times of the national standard as of 4:00 p.m. ednesday, the spokesman said.
hen the polluted water flowed further downstream, the content of nitrobenzene was reduced further to only about 10.7 times of above the national standard and that of benzene 0.08 times of the national standard, he said.
hang said as the polluted water flows downstream, the density of pollutants has markedly subsided.
he operation of the city's water supply system was temporarily resumed on ednesday afternoon following a forecast by hina's tate nvironmental rotection dministration () that the polluted water will not reach the city until hursday.
he ilin and eilongjiang provincial governments have activated their contingency programs for environmental incidents, and have taken measures to ensure the safety of potable water, said the official.
hina focus: hina pledges to minimize impact of river pollution on ussia
n the morning of ov. 24, the tate nvironmental rotection dministration () elaborated the details of the pollution to the ussian embassy in hina, including various test results.
easures already taken by the local governments include blocking the entry of pollutants, discharging more water from two reservoirs to dilute the pollutants, organizing experts to study control measures and enhancing monitoring work, part of the environmental emergency response mechanism activated shortly after the explosion.
he plant was run by the ilin etroleum and hemical ompany, which is under the state-owned hina ational etroleum orp. _ the country's largest oil company.
arbin, home to nine million population including 3.8 million in the urban districts, has cut off water supply in the urban areas since early ednesday, an emergency action taken to ensure public safety.
arbin, a city of more than 3 million residents, stops drawing water from the onghua iver for four days starting ednesday.
uality of the river water is under close observation for 24 hours every day.
he onghua iver is a tributary of the eilong iver (called mur iver in ussia) on the border between the ussian far east and hina.
he massive floating pollutants traversing the arbin section of northeast hina's onghua iver is unlikely to cause big troubles to the city's rural areas,  according to a senior hydrologist.
t also organized environmental, water conservancy and chemical experts to discuss pollution control plans, and beefed up monitoring work.
ccording to the official, observation data shows the degree of river water pollution has been declining.
overnor of the province hang uoji on hursday warned locals as well as animal husbandry against using water from the polluted onghua iver.
he content of nitrobenzene in the polluted water exceeded the national safe standard by 29.9 times and that of benzene 2.6 times when it passed haoyuan from ov. 20 to 22.
"he two sides are making specific arrangements for opening a hotline for the matter," said hang ijun, deputy director of .
eanwhile, the ierji ydropower tation on the river also enlarged the discharging flow from 20 cubic meters per second to 120 cubic meters per second.
he municipal government of arbin has notified local residents about the coming pollution so that people have enough time to store water.
he flow is expected to return to 600 cubic meters per second in the evening.
he engman ydropower tation in the upper reach of onghua iver increased the daily discharge amount from 600 cubic meters per second to 1,000 cubic meters per second starting from 10:00 a.m. hursday.
he pollutants, stretching around 80 kilometers long, will be further diluted after they pass arbin in around 40 hours as several major tributaries are to join the onghua iver.
enzene is a substance harmful to human health.
hang said the government will step up crackdown on polluting enterprises, noting 2,682 polluting plants have been shut down from ay last year to eptember this year.
remier en iabao has ordered the environmental department and regional governments to take effective measures to guarantee the safety of potable water, beefing up monitoring work and providing accurate information.
o far, local officials have dispatched work groups to patrol along the river to enforce the governor's order.
in azhang, deputy chief engineer of the eilongjiang rovincial ydrological ureau, said that nearly 90 percent of residents living along the downstream section in arbin rely on underground water as their source of drinking water.
t has compelled cities along the river to suspend water taking from the river for various periods.
n ednesday, the tate ouncil set a target of combating environmental degradation for the next 15 years.
hang, asked at the meeting to respond to the public concern over the water poison accident that occurred in northeast hina's onghua iver, vowed to take tougher measures to reduce the emission of pollutants.
he official said upon receiving the report, the administration immediately sent experts to eilongjiang rovince to assist local pollution-control efforts.
"oth have pledged to cooperate closely to handle the pollution."
onitoring staff can only take samples to test the pollution density, he said.
esidents in arbin cleared shelves of water, soft drinks and milk this week after the water system was shut down on uesday.
he drifting polluted block is unlikely to cause too much inconvenience in their daily life, he added.
he blast of the petrochemical plant happened about 350 kilometer away from the hina-ussia boundary.
y 2020, hina's environmental quality and ecological status should be improved remarkably, according to the plan.
he tate ouncil has dispatched an expert group, headed by director of the ational ureau of roduction afety upervision and dministration i izhong, to arbin to handle the accident.
he enlarged water current would not only help dilute pollution in the river, but also slowed down freezing of the river water downstream.
he finance department of the eilongjiang provincial government has allocated 10 million yuan (approximately 1.23 million  dollars) specially for handling the pollution incident, said the official.
ome has deposited and some has been absorbed along the way.
 has incorporated the pollution-reduction measures hina's major rivers, including the onghua and uanghe rivers, into the country's eleventh five-year economic and social development program, which means putting the task as one of the country's top concerns, said hang.
he two countries are setting concrete arrangements to open a hot line for better contact and communication over the water problem.
amilies also stocked up by filling bathtubs and buckets.
he toxic contents in the water are declining gradually after days of sedimentation, experts said, citing water monitoring statistics.