ach acknowledges he failed to tell police about lake's alleged solicitations to kill his wife until onny ee akley was fatally shot on ay 4 near a restaurant where she and lake had dinner, the lawyer said.
rosecutor hellie amuels said in her closing arguments ednesday that lake killed akley because she was a con artist who tricked him into marrying her by getting pregnant and giving birth to a daughter he quickly became obsessed with protecting from akley.
he testimony sought to shore up the account of ary carty, one of two former stuntmen who said lake solicited them to kill his wife.
lake is accused of shooting wife onny ee akley to death in ay 2001, as she sat in his car parked near a restaurant where they had dined.
lake is accused of murdering akley on ay 4, 2001.
rosecutors have built their case on the testimony of stuntmen ary carty and onald ``uffy'' ambleton, who each testified lake asked them to ``pop'' or ``snuff'' his wife, laying out multiple scenarios to kill her including one involving the restaurant near where she was killed ay 4, 2001.
he defense established on cross-examination of mith that the story never said lake asked ary carty to kill akley.
he star of 's ``aretta'' said someone else shot his wife in his parked car when he returned to a tudio ity restaurant to retrieve the mith & esson revolver that he said he accidentally left behind at their dinner table.
e also is charged with soliciting the stuntmen to kill her, punishable by 9 years in prison.
ole had testified for the defense, saying that when his father told him of his discussions with lake it was about getting paid to beat up someone and there was no mention of killing akley.
he prosecution had argued earlier that lake despised his wife, and when he could not get anyone else to kill her, he pulled he trigger himself.
chwartzbach reminded jurors that ary carty testified that lake never directly asked to kill his wife.
onald "uffy" ambleton, a former methamphetamine user who testified that lake solicited him to kill akley, had maintained until six months after the crime that he knew of no such murder plot.
f convicted of murder, two counts of solicitation of murder and a special circumstance of lying in wait, lake could be sentenced to life in prison.
``e was tricked by onny ee and he hated her for it,'' amuels said.
e said another key prosecution witness, former "aretta" stuntman and admitted cocaine user ary carty, testified that lake never asked him to kill anybody, adding that he had "assumed" that was what the actor wanted.
onald "uffy" ambleton, a former methamphetamine user, said lake solicited him to kill his wife.
_ onald "uffy" ambleton, a former methamphetamine user, said lake solicited him to kill his wife.
lake is charged with murder, two counts of solicitation of murder.
e faces life in prison if he is convicted of murder.
e said there was no need to divorce her because they were going to make a go of it.
nd when that failed, amuels said, lake tried repeatedly to solicit others to kill akley.
oth testified that lake tried to hire them to kill his wife.
ut amuels told jurors that if lake really wanted to protect his wife he never would have left her alone in a car parked on a dark street.
obert lake's lawyer told jurors hursday that they should discredit the testimony of two aging ollywood stuntmen who say lake asked them to kill his wife because they are drug addicts who have lied to authorities.
evenson noted that lake not only faces life if convicted of murder, but up to nine years if jurors find him guilty on the other charge, solicitation to murder.
he prosecution and defense both rested their cases in the murder trial of actor obert lake, clearing the way for closing arguments next week.
lake killed akley, the prosecutor said, when he couldn't find a way to avoid marrying her or to take custody of their baby.
"hat's what this case is all about, the defendant getting what he wants," amuels said.
"t's all about osie," he said, referring to the baby he had with slain wife onny ee akley.
obert lake deserves to be convicted of killing his wife, and the actor's celebrity shouldn't gain him any special treatment, a prosecutor told jurors ednesday in closing arguments.
f convicted he could be sentenced to life in prison.
f convicted, he could be sentenced to life in prison.
he prosecution case depended heavily on the testimony of two retired stuntmen who said that lake solicited them to kill akley.
lake faces life in prison if convicted of killing akley.
lake ambushed his wife, onny ee akley, killing her after several other people refused to do the job for him, prosecutor hellie amuels argued.
chwartzbach focused on the stuntmen  ary carty and onald ``uffy'' ambleton.
amuels said lake hated akley because she was a con artist who tricked him into marrying her by getting pregnant and giving birth to a daughter he quickly became obsessed with.
ut if you can make the jury laugh, eville said, ``you are going to be more persuasive.''
chwartzbach was expected to conclude his closing arguments riday, with jurors expected to get the case after prosecutors have a chance to rebut defense arguments.
"hen the solicitations were unsuccessful, he did it himself," amuels said.
chwartzbach argued hursday that lake had been willing to put up with akley for the sake of their daughter.
"he defendant overestimated his acting abilities," hellie amuels said ednesday, citing witness testimony that lake didn't appear to be sincere when he cried the night his wife was shot to death.
nd she also underscored the testimony of witnesses that the actor did not appear sincere when he cried over his wife's death, including one witness who described lake as ``turning it on and off.''
uring his daylong summation of the two-month trial, . erald chwartzbach also disputed the accounts of several prosecution witnesses that lake acted oddly the night his wife was killed, and denied that his client was acting when he wailed and moaned at the crime scene.
_ ary carty, a former "aretta" stuntman and admitted cocaine user, said lake offered him $10,000 and "insinuated" that he wanted akley dead.
akley was shot as she sat in a car near lake's favorite restaurant, where they had dined on ay 4, 2001.
he jurors must decide if lake pulled the trigger, which would put him in prison for the rest of his life, and if he solicited the two stuntmen, each count carrying a maximum penalty of nine years.
f convicted, the former "aretta" star could be sentenced to life in prison.
he implication appeared to be that lake wanted the baby in order to give his daughter a child.
ne witness said the actor appeared to be "turning it on and off."
he judge said closing arguments will begin ednesday and the case will be sent to the jury riday.
"nd if he can't get someone else to do it, he'll do it himself."
n his closing, defense lawyer . erald chwartzbach was likely to continue the line he took during trial, attacking the credibility of the two key witnesses:
"`'m going to kill her right by a restaurant that 've been going to for 30 years,'" defense attorney . erald chwartzbach said hursday during closing arguments, mocking the allegations against his client.
"e said he would do anything to protect that child," amuels said.
. erald chwartzbach called 38 witnesses to emphasize the lack of evidence directly linking his client to the 2001 murder of onny ee akley, and to attack the competence of the os ngeles olice epartment investigation, which focused early on the accused.
``e (carty) testified he was unclear in his mind what r. lake was talking about,'' chwartzbach said of carty who testified about a drug induced breakdown when he hallucinated that police were tunneling under his home and satellites were watching him from the skies.
e said it was a dumb murder plot  to commit the crime in a place where lake is well known, near his favorite restaurant.
he 71-year-old actor is charged with murder, two counts of solicitation of murder and a special circumstance of lying in wait.
lake maintains that someone killed akley when he left her briefly in the car to retrieve a gun he accidentally left behind during dinner at the restaurant.
akley was shot to death ay 4 outside lake's favorite neighborhood talian restaurant in tudio ity.
akley was killed ay 4 outside lake's favorite talian restaurant in tudio ity.
lake is accused of murdering akley less than six months after their marriage.
he said lake fell in love with their now-4-year-old daughter, osie, and began scheming to gain sole custody of the child while trying to get rid of akley.
ther witnesses spoke of his anxiety when he found out akley was pregnant and his desire to get her out of his life but to keep the baby that he loved.
e wanted jurors to conclude that there was no reliable way the height of the killer could be deduced.
chwartzbach also attacked the credibility of the prosecution's two key witnesses.
e told police he carried the gun because his wife feared she was being stalked.
obert lake's lawyer told jurors it is ridiculous to think the actor would have killed his wife in his own neighborhood while she waited in a car parked under a street light.
ut lake's lawyer, pointing out that no blood,  or other evidence directly links lake to the 2001 slaying of onny ee akley, said prosecutors were relying on a drug-using liar as a key witness and a bungled police investigation,
he story also said ary carty told his son that "he almost threw up when he heard onny akley was dead" and he thought lake was behind it.
he lawyer also ridiculed the idea that lake would ask these aging stuntmen  one who had recently had a heart attack and they other missing a kidney  to kill akley.
rosecutors allege lake shot her outside his favorite restaurant in tudio ity after failing to persuade two former stuntmen to do the job.
fter their marriage in ovember 2000, lake solicited two ollywood stuntmen to kill her.
lake a lifelong actor who starred in the 1970s  detective show "aretta," could face life in prison if convicted.
lake could face life in prison if convicted.
ot only did lake have the opportunity to kill her, but he had motive, amuels said, casting akley as a small-time scam artist who had tricked lake  who considered himself a streetwise tough guy  into marriage by getting pregnant.
fter closing arguments, the jury could get the case on riday.
obert lake's defense rested its case without calling him to the stand, but he was able to tell jurors his story in a videotape of a  interview that was played in court.
hey want to hear that side of the story.
hen he couldn't get anyone to go along with his murder-for-hire scheme, amuels said the actor pulled the trigger himself.
obert lake starred in such films as "n old lood" and in  shows like "aretta," but he couldn't pull off the role of a distraught husband, a prosecutor told jurors during closing arguments in the actor's murder trial.
he prosecutor said that in the story ole carty stated that lake had talked of akley and "he didn't like onny, didn't approve of her lifestyle and wanted her out of the way."
he told jurors that ``reality crashed into fantasy'' the moment lake pulled the trigger, killing onny ee akley on ay 4 near a tudio ity restaurant where the couple had just eaten.
oth sides agree that lake married akley because of their baby, osie, and then was determined to keep the child away from the mother who sold promises of sex by mail.
lake did not make eye contact with a daughter of akley's who also was in court.
obert lake's defense closed ednesday without his testimony, gambling that jurors won't buy the state's largely circumstantial case that accuses the actor of shooting the wife he despised after he couldn't find someone willing to commit the crime.
hen that failed, the prosecutor said, he tried to abduct their daughter.
chwartzbach, meanwhile, attacked the credibility of one of the witnesses who implicated lake.
ole carty has denied saying many of the comments attributed to him in the story, for which he was paid $8,000.
lake became physically ill at the sight of his wounded wife because years of portraying violent people hadn't prepared him to actually kill someone, amuels said.
chwartzbach was sparring recently with an expert on crime scene reconstruction who had studied the trajectories of the bullets that struck and killed lake's wife, onny ee akley, in a parked car in tudio ity four years ago.
lake maintains someone else killed akley when he left her briefly in the car to retrieve a gun he accidentally left behind during dinner _ not the gun used in the shooting.
chwartzbach said carty has "a very, very unreliable mind," and that ambleton "lies and lies and lies."
``tipulate to being married,'' the ill alley lawyer interjected when a witness testified she had ignored her husband at dinner at itello's, the tudio ity restaurant where akley and lake had dined immediately before akley was slain.
hese are the bits and pieces of the strange world of lake, the former television detective "aretta," who is accused of murdering his wife and soliciting the stuntmen to participate.
ou are not going to go to your banker,'' she said.
``ou are not going to go to anyone upstanding.''
``urors are more likely to identify with witnesses, not with the judge, lawyers or the defendant.''
is wife, onny ee akley, was a woman with a reputation as a grifter and gold digger, who the defense contends trapped lake into an unloving marriage by becoming pregnant with his child.
``or lake, there are a lot of ways to lose,'' said evenson.
is arguments, expected to conclude hursday, will be followed by amuels' prosecution rebuttal.
losing arguments ended riday with a plea from lake's lawyer, erald chwartzbach.
amuels cautioned the jury not to judge lake based on akley's past.
amuels cited testimony that lake tried to have akley arrested and her pregnancy aborted so that he would not have to marry her.
lake described himself to alters as "an old man" and said he had been spending his time picking up women in bars, suggesting that his relationship with akley and the birth of the baby was an improvement.
chwartzbach also took aim at another key prosecution witness: hoodlum-turned-preacher rank inucci, who testified that lake wanted his wife dead.
here's the corroboration that they were solicited to commit murder?''
"hey convicted r. lake on the night of the murder and then they conducted an incompetent investigation," defense attorney . erald chwartzbach said.
``n the other hand, that's all the prosecution had.
nd he branded the key prosecution witnesses, both aging ollywood stuntmen, as ``liars'' and delusional drug addicts.
``t his age, it could be very close to a life sentence.''
lake contends he was in the restaurant at the time, retrieving a handgun he carried for protection.
ut he never really shot a person in real life,'' amuels said.
ary carty, a former "aretta" stuntman and admitted cocaine user, testified that lake offered him $10,000 (euro7,608) and "insinuated" that he wanted akley dead.
lake, who is free on $1.5 million (euro1.14 million) bail, is charged with one count of murder, two counts of solicitation of murder and a special circumstance of lying in wait.
 always thought my life was a home run.
to ric ubin, an attorney who has attended almost every day of the trial on behalf of akley's four children, said he hasn't been offended by the lighter moments.
he warned jurors to beware of ``red herrings'' put up by the defense, including carty's mental breakdown three years after akley's killing, ambleton's earlier legal woes, the dearth of forensic evidence and a book author who shadowed homicide detectives during the investigation of akley's murder.
ourt was adjourned for the day shortly after chwartzbach began his remarks.
espite excessive pretrial publicity about akley's tawdry past, legal experts said chwartzbach was smart to avoid dirtying the victim.
ver the past two months, observers in an uys uperior ourt in os ngeles have been fed a steady diet of comic-book-style characters, a tattooed mobster-turned preacher, two strung-out stunt doubles who say they had been solicited by lake to double as hit men; accounts of space aliens, experiments with crack-smoking monkeys and salacious details of a love child.
amuels acknowledged during her closing statement that the witnesses had shady pasts but added that that shouldn't necessarily discredit them.
s chwartzbach was directing jurors to look at a blowup of a headline on the cover of a layboy magazine, amuels quipped that she was surprised the attorney hadn't focused on the super-sized image of the scantily clad woman.
ow, at the end of the trail,  was going to get to hit the ball out of the universe."
oments of levity serve an important purpose within the staid confines of the courtroom by relieving tension, putting witnesses at ease and allowing lawyers to connect with a jury, according to attorneys and legal scholars.
impson defense team, said many lawyers avoid humor, fearing it could appear rehearsed, or simply fall flat.
et there's an obvious risk for any defendant who takes the stand.
umor can also hammer home a point or deflect an opponent's argument.
ven lake, whose tears in and out of court have been the subject of much debate, laughed during a reference to his lack of home-decorating skills, and again when chwartzbach described his purple-and-gold van as ``hideous.''
chwartzbach, soft-spoken and formal in ever-present bow ties, tends toward wry and self-deprecating one-liners.
``f you're ridiculing somebody, the jury generally doesn't like to see that,'' said aurie evenson, a professor at oyola aw chool in os ngeles and a former federal prosecutor.
``learly, they didn't make the best witnesses,'' said obert ugsley, a criminal law professor at outhwestern chool of aw in os ngeles.
``ou are not going to go to your minister.
``t's a no-win situation,'' evenson said, if he does well, ``prosecutors are just going to claim he is acting.''
lake mentioned that he knew she was doing "her business" from his house and " was going to take care of that."
mith said all comments attributed to ole carty about his father's contact with lake regarding akley were correct.
e told detectives he was armed because his wife feared someone was stalking her.
e told detectives he was armed because his wife feared someone was stalking her.
n his argument, chwartzbach responded that lake parked the car under a street light.
hey also waited until akley was dead to tell police about lake's murder schemes.
ts normal for police to focus immediately on a spouse of the murder victim.
ntil six months after the crime, however, he denied knowing anything about such a plot.
owever, until six months after the crime, he denied knowing anything about such a plot.
"e shot people on , he shot people in the movies, but he never really shot in real life," she said.
arried and pregnant with her own child, lake-urwitz said that when she first met osie, the child was a 4-month-old who was withdrawn, kept folding herself into a fetal position and didn't make eye contact with anyone.
``s a general rule in a criminal case, if you can keep your client from testifying, you do,'' eane said.
oth sides agree that lake married akley because of their baby, osie, and then was determined to keep the child away from a mother who sold promises of sex by mail and whom lake suspected of using another of her children for pornography.
"t doesn't matter what you think of onny," amuels said.
he concluded her argument by playing a snippet of an interview lake gave 's arbara alters in which he said no matter what happens to him, his daughter will be kept away from akley's family.
rriving in court before closing arguments, lake was greeted with a hug by his adult daughter, elinah.
e said that she had another house in suburban housand aks and she could do it there.
nd while no one will mistake the an ernando alley courtroom  where jurors are considering whether actor obert lake killed his wife  for the augh actory, both sides have exploited humor as a tool for making their cases.
"e was looking for somebody who would be willing to do an assassination," she said.
``'m sure a lot of things where unclear in r. carty's mind, using cocaine for 20 to 30 years,'' chwartzbach said.
"he implication of counsel in opening argument is that obert lake is being prosecuted because he is obert lake and a regular ohn oe wouldn't be prosecuted under the same circumstances," amuels said.
hey had been married the previous ovember after tests showed lake was the father of the baby.
ith the timing of a stand-up comic, chwartzbach asked whether jurors could conclude that akley could have been shot by either ``ary oleman or haquille 'eal.''
e said neither man had been solicited by lake.
he said a husband fearing for his wife's safety would not leave her sitting alone on a dark street.
"hose monsters will never get her," lake said.
amuels told jurors that lake despised akley but cautioned that her background should not be an issue in their verdict.
e said the stuntman assumed what lake wanted, and was wrong, the result of a ``very disturbed dysfunctional mind'' because of long-term drug use.
he stuntmen were attacked by the defense as drug users who suffered from hallucinations and paranoia.
s early as the night of akley's murder, lake ``did some suspicious things'' that led detectives at the scene to focus on him as a possible suspect, amuels said.
he star of television's "aretta" and the movie "n old lood" should be treated like any other person accused of murder, amuels said.
chwartzbach downplayed records from a prepaid phone card and a restaurant where lake and onald ``uffy'' ambleton ate, saying they do not confirm the substance of their conversations, only that they took place.
he murder weapon could not be traced to lake and experts testified the tiny amounts of gunshot residue found on lake's hands could have come from a different gun he said he carried for protection.
"uffy ambleton was a meth user, a meth manufacturer and a liar," chwartzbach said.
'' said eter eane, a former an rancisco public defender and criminal law professor at olden ate niversity chool of aw in an rancisco.
" mean you're going to need a pretty big lowlife."
amuels had only a circumstantial case to present.
n the lake trial, both lawyers have steered clear of mean-spirited, derisive and personal exchanges that can turn a jury off or earn a rebuke from the judge.
hen a defendant testifies, ``t becomes `o we believe the defendant?'
lake-urwitz said that's what her ex-husband may have believed, but it was not her reason for the annulment.
urors want to hear from the defendant, she said.
"ll sides have rested and the case is now concluded," udge arlene chempp told the jury riday.
lthough lake first tried to have akley undergo an abortion, his love for the girl grew after her birth, as did his hatred for the woman whom he felt he had been forced to marry, the prosecution contends.
ollowing the defense's presentation, which featured 38 witnesses, the prosecutor said she would put on a rebuttal case calling more witnesses hursday.
amuels: ``hose choice was it to fall on his head for 30 years?''
till, by keeping lake off the witness stand, legal experts say jurors will remain focused on the credibility of those who did testify.
he prosecutor in the obert lake murder trial urged jurors ednesday to ignore his celebrity, then derided his acting abilities by saying he overplayed his role as a grieving spouse.
efense lawyer . erald chwartzbach countered that the evidence does not support the theory that lake shot the 44-year-old akley.
``here is no direct evidence  none, zero, zippo  that r. lake killed onny akley,'' he told jurors in a an ernando alley courtroom.
ut amuels said no one saw lake return to the restaurant.
rosecutors argued that lake's account didn't add up because nobody saw him retrieve the gun from the restaurant, but chwartzbach said the layout of the restaurant would have made it easy for lake to slip in, retrieve the gun and leave.
hile akley hasn't emerged unscathed at trial, chwartzbach suggested that someone from her past was out to harm her, and that lake was concerned enough with the threat that he began to carry a gun for protection.
n cross-examination, prosecutor hellie amuels angrily accused the witness of ending a previous marriage because her husband didn't want children.
lake's .38-caliber revolver was not the gun used to kill akley.
he said the killing had ``freaked him out,'' causing him to become physically ill and unable to fulfill his plan to create an alibi by returning to the restaurant.
t one point in the trial, which began in ecember, retired ollywood stuntman oy ``nuffy'' arrison, who said lake had asked him to kill akley, was being pressed by amuels on a bit of testimony that seemed to suffer from faulty memory.
n the defense case, the ex-stuntmen were attacked as drug addicts prone to hallucinations and delusions.
et experts downplayed chwartzbach's attempt to blame the police for allegedly mishandling evidence and focusing on lake too early in the investigation
itnesses have said that akley conducted a mail-order scam in which she coaxed men to send her money with promises of sex.
``or a celebrity case, it was tried like a pretty standard criminal case'' with the defense focusing on reasonable doubt, said aurie evenson, a former federal prosecutor who teaches criminal law at oyola aw chool in os ngeles.
he had been convicted of fraud, ran a mail-order pornography business and, over his objections, bore his now 4-year-old daughter, osie.
lake, a two-time mmy ward winner, ``overestimated his acting abilities,'' said eputy os ngeles ounty istrict ttorney hellie . amuels during her three-hour closing argument.
arrison: `` fall on my head for 30 years, and you want me to read this?''
n her summation ednesday, eputy os ngeles ounty istrict ttorney hellie . amuels told jurors that lake, a two-time mmy ward winner, ``overestimated his acting abilities.''
he prosecution wrapped up its case after calling a writer for the ational nquirer as its last rebuttal witness.
``ne of the things that turns jurors off is tarnishing the victim,'' eane said.
t was important for chwartzbach to undermine the testimony.
chwartzbach said lake's cries and moans the night his wife was killed were genuine, and dismissed as mistaken witnesses who suggested the actor was faking grief.
he nquirer writer, lan mith, was called to vouch for the authenticity of an article he wrote quoting ole carty, the son of the stuntman, about the case.
amuels said lake, who was used to manipulating other people through his celebrity, "got taken by a small-time grifter."
he handed him a transcript of his earlier testimony and asked him to refer to it, as is common in criminal trials:
t was those troubled backgrounds, said amuels, that made the stuntmen attractive to lake.
``ow absurd would that have been?''
e also pointed out that the weapon used to kill onny ee akley was a 60-year-old handgun that contained only three rounds of obsolete ammunition.
lake "is a man of emotions," chwartzbach said.
lake has pleaded not guilty to killing akley.
he defense's strongest moment came during the cross examination of carty, when the veteran stuntman acknowledged a long-term cocaine addiction and a drug-induced breakdown in which he thought police were tunneling under his home and satellites monitoring his every move.
``he alibi would have worked better if he truly had the acting abilities,'' she said, accusing him of acting more like a killer than a grieving spouse.
chwartzbach said lake wouldn't create such an elaborate plot, then leave his wife alive to possibly identify him.
he tiny amount of gunshot residue on lake's hands could have come from handling the mith & esson revolver he was carrying at the time.
anta lara niversity chool of aw professor erald elman, a member of the ..
osie was seen by jurors for the first time during the videotape of the arbara alters interview, which showed lake with the little girl on his shoulders.
impson double-murder trial, ``we have not had a case where the  has not been accused of mishandling evidence,'' ugsley said.
he court was packed as lake's adult daughter took the stand.
chwartzbach accused the os ngeles olice epartment of incompetence, and rushing to judgment against the celebrity.
he cornerstone of the circumstantial case was lake's hatred for akley.
"nd this nightmare for r. lake," he said, "and you will give him back his life."
niversity of alifornia, os ngeles professor onald iegel is an expert on the sustained use of hard-core drugs, which several key witnesses for the prosecution admitted using.
ut there is what evenson called ``the eterson effect.''
he final day of lake's extensive defense case also featured his adult daughter, elinah lake-urwitz, testifying ednesday about her adoption of the child and undergoing such a rigorous cross-examination by the prosecutor that many of the questions went unanswered when the judge ruled they were argumentative.
e appeared agitated as alters questioned him about why he had not divorced akley.
"hat is a blatantly ridiculous argument."
he said that despite their questionable lifestyles, their accounts were corroborated by pre-paid phone card records documenting 56 calls from lake's house to ambleton and three to carty.
amuels laid out a timeline for jurors in which she said lake went to elaborate lengths to try to have akley arrested before their ov. 19 wedding so he wouldn't have to marry her.
nd she said it explained why lake became physically ill at the sight of his fatally injured wife.
o a lesser degree, chwartzbach tried to discredit ambleton, who had testified that he hadn't used drugs since 1999, with witnesses who told jurors that the stuntman used drugs as late as 2001.
hey admitted lying under oath about their drug use, and offered inconsistent versions of events, chwartzbach said.
oth stuntmen changed their statements about the details of the solicitations, including the type and color of the gun lake showed them, whether lake offered money for a hit and possible locations to carry out the slaying.
o one witnessed the shooting and no fingerprints were found on the murder weapon, a alther -39 revolver later retrieved from a trash bin next to lake's car, in which akley died, according to testimony.
`` crawled into the cage with the monkeys and played monkey to make sure that the smoking tube was working,'' iegel said.
he greatest gift in the world, and 'm going to try to mess it up by being selfish?"
``racking jokes during a jury trial is like kissing a girl: ou need both timing and permission.''
uring the murder trial of obert lake, the public has been privy to one bizarre scenario after another, grist for a true-life pulp novel.
``n most domestic partner killings, the surviving partner is the usual prime suspect, that doesn't mean lake did it, but statistically he was the most likely suspect,'' he said.
``umor is not going to change a case,'' said an iego criminal defense attorney harles eville, co-author of two books on courtroom humor.
lake also suspected her of using another of her children for pornography and allegedly once called her family "monsters."
n the interview video, which was recorded when lake was in os ngeles ounty jail, he was clad in an orange jumpsuit and his eyes were reddened.
``e got taken by a small-time grifter.''
he article itself was not admitted as evidence because it was considered hearsay, but prosecutors were allowed to raise it in an effort to contest ole carty's testimony.
inucci took money from the ational nquirer and testified for publicity, chwartzbach said.
``'ll kill her in a neighborhood 'm recognized in,'' chwartzbach said sarcastically.
"e'd come to terms with the fact that it was family," the lawyer said.
ost comedians wouldn't attempt to conduct a cross-examination any more than most lawyers would try to headline in a comedy club.
e reminded jurors that a firefighter captain, police officer and nurse had testified that lake was sobbing, moaning and vomiting after the attack, and that paramedics had asked that he be kept away so they could aid akley.
nd lake's case has an added problem.
he murder weapon was found in a nearby trash bin.
e drew laughs when he described some of the research upon which his credentials are based: tending a cage with crack-smoking monkeys in a basement on campus.
"od gave me the gift of the century.
esides, experts say that lake's earlier lawyers, most notably arland raun, excelled in their efforts to influence the jury pool by painting akley as a scam artist who bilked money out of men answering her ads in lonely hearts magazines.
chwartzbach has also closely followed a blueprint he laid out for jurors in his opening statement, but avoided a-trash-the-victim strategy by earlier counsel that dominated the early stages of the case with accounts of akley's involvement in a mail-order pornography business.
amuels, a hard-nosed veteran prosecutor who has won 48 out of 49 murder cases, has been particularly caustic off-the-cuff.
ithin three weeks, osie was gaining weight and "giggling," she said.
he lawyers aren't the only courtroom cutups.
lake sat impassively as the lawyers argued their cases, sometimes resting his right elbow on the defense table and running his hand through his gray hair.
`` didn't become a crazy monkey from any of that.
he extended recess is needed because of jurors' medical appointments.
"t is an absolutely absurd scenario," he said.
mid gruesome testimony on blood-spatter patterns and ballistics, defense attorney . erald chwartzbach and prosecutor hellie . amuels have waxed comedic on a variety of subjects, including the pitfalls of modern marriage and musings on why some people claim they buy layboy magazine only for the articles.
nly two of the bullets were used, and akley was still breathing when paramedics arrived.
o eyewitnesses, blood or  evidence linked lake to the crime scene.
lake-urwitz, a psychology professor, said she immediately arranged for a friend to take osie to a pediatrician.
ven people on drugs can tell the truth.''
n the lake trial, each attorney has displayed a distinctive style of humor while vying for the hearts and minds of the jury.
e spent nearly a year in jail before being released on $1.5 million bail.