he dye, known as udan , is linked to an increased risk of cancer, but is not thought to be a risk to health at the concentrations used in these products, said a  report.
he ood tandards gency () has launched an unprecedented probe into how a potentially cancer-causing dye contaminated at least 474 products, ranging from ready-made meals to popular sauces, that have been withdrawn from sale.
"he vast majority of products contaminated with the illegal dye udan  have been removed from sale," the agency said in a statement.
udan , a potentially cancer- causing colorant, is the latest target for hina's product quality watchdogs after the disclosure that the red dye has tainted hundreds of food items in ritain, hursday's hina aily reported.
"udan  can contribute to an increased risk of cancer but at the levels present the risk is likely to be very small," the agency said in a statement.
he total number of affected goods, ranging from ready-made-meals to popular sauces, came to 474 after a previous list of some 430 items issued by the ood tandards gency () was found to have a number of duplications, it said.
ritain's ood tandards gency on hursday extended a list of foods that could be contaminated with a dye linked to cancer.
he red-coloured dye, which is used for colouring non-edible items such as petrol and shoe polish, was found in a batch of chilli powder used by the ritish company remium oods to make orcester auce, which was then used as an ingredient in a wide range of products, the  said.
he red-coloured dye, which is used for colouring non-edible items such as petrol and shoe polish, was found in a batch of chilli powder used by the ritish company remium oods to make orcester sauce, which was then added as an ingredient in a wide range of products.
he red-coloured dye, which is used for colouring non-edible items such as gasoline and shoe polish, was found in a batch of chilli powder used by the ritish company remier oods to make orcester sauce, which was then added as an ingredient in a wide range of products.
he red-colored dye, which is used for coloring industrial products such as gasoline and shoe polish, was found in a batch of chilli powder used by the ritish company remier oods to make orcester sauce, which was then added as an ingredient in a wide range of products.
"onsumers are reminded that the risk is very small, that there is no risk of immediate illness but it is sensible not to eat affected products," it said.
ritain's food safety watchdog ordered the recall of more than 350 food products riday after it said that a potentially cancer-causing dye had been discovered.
ritain's food safety watchdog hursday added another 146 products to a list of items tainted by a potentially cancer-causing dye in the country's largest food recall yet.
ritain's food watchdog said hursday it has launched an unprecedented investigation into how an allegedly cancer-causing agent udan 1 find its way into the string of ritish food industry.
he director of ood tandard gency () avid tatham said in a statement that "local authorities across the country have visited a number of premises to look at records and take samples," adding that "this is a major investigation".
"owever, at the levels present the risk is likely to be very small but it is sensible to avoid eating any more," he said in a statement.
he watchdog agency riday recalled 359 products, ranging from ready-made-meals to a popular brand of instant noodles, after finding traces of the illegal dye udan .
t is not allowed to be added to food in the urope nion.
he sauce was then added as an ingredient to at least 359 products made by supermarkets and leading food companies such as nilever.
udan 1 is a red dye used for coloring solvents, oils waxes, petrol and shoe polish and it is illegal to add it to food in ritain and the whole  region.
he ood tandards gency said udan  could contribute to an increased risk of cancer, but it was not possible to identify a safe level or to quantify the risk.
ver the past week, the  has ordered the withdrawal of 419 products, ranging from ready-made meals to popular sauces, because they are tainted by a potentially cancer-causing dye.
t is illegal to put udan 1 into food in ritain or elsewhere in the uropean nion, and all chilli powder imported since uly 2003 has to be certified free of the agent.
t is illegal to put udan 1 into food in ritain and the rest of the uropean nion and all chilli powder imported since uly 2003 has to be certified free of the agent.
t is illegal to put udan 1 into food in ritain or elsewhere in the uropean nion, and all chilli powder imported since uly 2003 has to be certified free of the agent.
he dye got into a batch of chilli powder which was used in a large consignment of rosse and lackwell orcester auce made by remier oods.
he ood tandards gency said it was working with the food industry and local authorities to make sure that all the affected products are removed from the shelves and urged members of the public who have them in their cupboards to contact the store where they were bought for a refund.
ritain's ood tandards gency on riday issued an urgent warning advising people not to eat more than 350 food products inadvertently contaminated with an illegal dye.
owever,  chief executive on ell told ky ews: "here is no risk of immediate illness and the general risk is very small.
he advice came after ritain's ood tandards gency () last week issued a warning that some 350 food products may be affected and should be withdrawn from the shelves.
etermined to find out how traces of the illegal dye udan 1 found its way into ritain's food chain, the  said it was conducting its largest ever investigation with the help of five local authorities.
ritain's food watchdog said hursday three companies were under investigation for their alleged role in a cancer scare that has triggered the country's largest food recall.
he ypriot ealth inistry has advised consumers not to eat contaminated foodstuffs, and restaurants, takeaways and hotels not to serve these food.
he ood tandards gency () onday extended the list of foods contaminated by carcinogenic colouring that it wants to recall from shop shelves and homes.
espite prompting an increased risk of cancer, the  has emphasised that the actual danger is very small given the levels present.
"here is no risk of immediate ill health but it is sensible to avoid eating any more," it said.
y uesday, the watchdog had released an updated list of 428 affected food products, ranging from  sauce to pies, including those made by einz and nilever.
udan  is a red dye used for coloring solvents, oil, waxes, petrol and shoe and floor polishes.
 total of 474 food products are now being recalled, amid fears they could contain traces of udan  _ a red dye used for coloring oils, waxes, petrol and shoe polish.
"ecause of the widespread use of this orcester sauce to flavor other foods, we may find further affected products.
"learly if anyone has any products throw them away or return them," he added.
he agency also asked local inspectors to check domestic food makers to ensure their products or raw materials are free of the dye.
" regret that more than 18 months after the ( decision) establishing the control regime, certain industrial operators have not faced up to their responsibilities and cleaned up their stocks of raw material," said  health and consumer protection commissioner arkos yprianou.
"he vast majority of contaminated foods has now been removed and that provides some reassurance to consumers," he said in a statement.
"udan  could contribute to an increased risk of cancer," said  chief executive on ell, while downplaying the gravity of the health risk.
he ood tandards gency sparked an international food safety alert on eb. 18 when it announced that a sauce contaminated with the dye had been used in hundreds of ritish foods and exported to several uropean and aribbean countries and to orth merica.
he offending sample is thought to have entered ritain before that time.
"ocal authorities across the country have visited a number of premises to look at records and take samples," he said.
e will continue to take action to remove these and minimize the risk to consumers," he said.
"his is a major investigation," said tatham.
undreds of products have been affected in thousands of shops," said avid tatham, the 's director of enforcement, as the agency added another 146 items to its black list.
"here is no risk of immediate ill health," ell said.
ood that contains the substance is not allowed to be sold or exported, a statement from the hinese agency said.
etermined to find out how traces of the dye found their way into ritain's food chain, the  said it was conducting its largest ever investigation with the help of five local authorities.
urope-wide rules introduced in une 2003 controlling products like the udan 1 dye were not being enforced, the  executive said.
n russels, however, the uropean ommission expressed concern over the discovery of tainted food and said that other  states had been alerted.
he agency has published a full list of the affected items, which are stocked by ritain's main supermarket chains and include ready-made meals such as shepherd's pie, pasta bake, cottage pie, chicken wings, sausage casserole, pizza, steak and kidney pie and chilli con carne.
he uropean nion () executive said it stands ready to call newbeen used.
udan  is banned from food in ritain and across the uropean nion, and since 2003 all chili powder imported to ritain must be certified to be free of udan .
he chilli powder was used to make orcester sauce, and the delay in the tainted food reaching market is due to the long maturation process involved in producing the condiment.
ell said the problem was uncovered when supplies reached an talian company which tested for udan 1.
he offending sample is thought to have entered ritain beforehand.
he offending sample is thought to have entered ritain beforehand.
he agency said in the statement it has advised the local authorities to consider whether to take "enforcement action" based on the evidence gathered.
yprus health services have advised people not to eat foods imported from ritain that have contaminated an illegal dye named udan , local press reported uesday.
he  said it was working with supermarkets and other stores to remove the products from sale and reiterated its advice to the public to return products on the recall list to the places were they were bought.
"o groups, whether young, in hospital, elderly or pregnant are exposed to anything other than a very small risk."
t has ordered supermarkets over the past week to discard a growing list of food tainted by the illegal udan  dye and instructed food manufacturers to reveal any other affected products.
he foods, including soups, sauces and ready meals, have been distributed widely.
eanwhile the uropean ommission, reporting the results of a two-day meeting on the ritish scare, revealed that the batch of potentially cancer-causing udan  dye at the root of the concern came from ndia.
he batch thought to be responsible for the food scare predates the sampling program.
he restaurants and hotels should also report to the authorities whether they have already purchased any affected product.
here are also a number of products made by well-known ritish food companies, including three flavours of nilever's top-selling ot oodle brand affected: eef and omato, 'he izzler' acon lavour and ot og and etchup lavour.
sked whether any action had been taken with the companies, the spokesman said: "he investigation is ongoing."
"owever, there may be some products remaining both in shops and in the catering sector and we will continue to work with local authorities to remove them as far is practical and achievable."
he five local authorities involved in the investigation are in ssex and incolnshire counties and in the towns of outh olland, ochdale and asildon.
he tate dministration for uality upervision and nspection and uarantine ednesday slapped a ban on imports of any foods containing the carcinogenic substance, and began screening foods from the uropean nion.
he list of recalled foods includes dressings used by conald's fast food chain, packets of potato chips and pre-prepared meals.
he  commission said that 12 other  states have been alerted after the ritish scare erupted: elgium, yprus, enmark, pain, reece, rance, reland, taly, alta, the etherlands, ortugal and ustria.
he  remains alert to the possible spread of a ritish health scare into other  states, where experts are investigating whether a problem dye may also have tainted foodstuffs, officials said riday.
ll have a best before date of ovember 2005.
"his has been an enormous undertaking.
" am concerned that old stocks of chilli from before une 2003 appear still to be used by food processors," he said.
n  spokesman told  that the authorities had inspected three firms allegedly involved in the supply of tainted foods  remier oods, ast nglian ood ngredients and nbar othon.
nder ritish law, companies and their executives could face prosecution, unlimited fines and two years in prison, for failure to ensure that food placed on the market is safe and fit for human consumption.
he 38 new items include certain sausages, seasonings and pizzas.
hina has already forbidden the use of udan  in foods, according to agency sources.
t was uncovered when talian authorities carried out tests on a batch of orcestershire sauce shipped to taly from ngland.