CANBERRA, July 18 (Xinhua) -- The Papua New Guinea (PNG) Defense Force, the police and health services are on standby to help the victims of a tsunami that wiped out several villages, killing scores of people, on PNG's remote north-west coast Friday night.
Authorities at Aitape in the West Sepik province, on PNG's north-west coast, said the tsunami, that hit the coast west of Aitape on Friday night had wiped out three villages and had almost completely destroyed another, according to an Australian Associated Press report sent Sunday from Aitape.
The death toll so far from the tsunami that struck the coastline near the town of Aitape in the West Sepik (Sandaun) province Friday night, was officially announced 64 and many more people were missing.
CANBERRA, July 19 (Xinhua) -- The death toll in Papua New Guinea's (PNG) tsunami disaster has climbed to 599 and is expected to rise, a PNG disaster control officer said Sunday.
CANBERRA, July 19 (Xinhua) -- Australia Sunday sent three Air Force C130 Hercules aircraft loaded with medical and food supplies on an urgent mission to help survivors of a devastating tsunami which struck Papua New Guinea (PNG) Friday night.
"We will also transport a mobile hospital and associated Australian Defense Force (ADF) medical personnel to the disaster area to provide urgent medical assistance to injured victims," Downer said Saturday in a statement.
Igara said reports so far indicated that a community school, government station, Catholic mission station and the Nimas village in the Sissano area west of Aitape had been completely destroyed, where 30 people were dead.
Igara said the population in the area affected by the tsunami was 8,000 to 10,000 people.
The 10-metre tsunami engulfed the heavily populated villages near Aitape, 800 kilometers north of Port Moresby on Friday night - 30 minutes after an undersea earthquake of about 7.0 on the Richter scale in the area.
CANBERRA, July 18 (Xinhua) -- Australia will provide transport for relief supplies and a mobile hospital to Papua New Guinea (PNG) following Friday's tsunami tragedy.
Sixteen people in the devastated Arop village were confirmed dead, and two children had died in the Malalo village, which was wiped out.
"We'll be further liaising with the Papua New Guinea government to provide realistic help in those circumstances," he said.
PNG Prime Minister Bill Skate was expected to arrive in Aitape later Sunday afternoon to assess the situation.
Igara said the PNG Red Cross had confirmed arrangements to provide food supplies and authorities had asked the Australian High Commission in Port Moresby for immediate air transport support.
Dalle said the Nimas village near the Sissano lagoon, the Warapu village and the Arop village had been wiped out, and the Malol village had almost been completely destroyed.
At Warapu 500 people had been confirmed dead.
Many of the villagers are believed to have died instantly as the deadly wall of water struck without warning, sending their homes crashing into the raging torrent.
"They are scattered all over in the mangroves."
"It's very rough terrain and our problem is finding an area we can land and get in our equipment," he was quoted by the Australian Associated Press as saying.
"There are still people out there who are injured that we have not rescued," he said.
Foreign Affairs Minister Alexander Downer said a Royal Australian Air Force C130 Hercules aircraft currently in PNG on training exercises would be diverted to deliver relief supplies such as tarpaulins and food to the affected areas in the country's remote north.
And Warapu village had also been completely destroyed, with 11 confirmed deaths and many missing.
"Officers are now visiting the affected villages and areas to establish the whereabouts, safety and health of the population," he said.
The tidal wave smashed into the northwestern coastline near the town of Aitape in West Sepik province, killing at least 600 people, according to reports reaching here.
A 10-meter tsunami engulfed the heavily populated villages near Aitape, 800 km north of PNG's capital city of Port Moresby.
"Prime Minister Bill Skate has directed that immediate action be taken to arrange urgent supplies of food, water, shelter and cooking utensils while detailed assessments and reports are being prepared," Robert Igara, chief secretary of the PNG government, said Saturday in a statement, Australian Associated Press reported.
Australian Defense Minister Ian McLachlan told reporters in Adelaide that Australia's aid agency, AusAid, estimated the final toll would be well over 1,000, with many thousands injured and as many as 6,000 left homeless.
Deputy Prime Minister Tim Fischer described the events in PNG as "horrific", saying Australia would do all it could to help PNG cope with the crisis.
McLachlan said the aircraft were ferrying 60 medical personnel with the aim of setting up a mobile hospital in the area.
Meanwhile, Prime Minister Bill Skate, National Disaster Services Chairman Colin Travertz and National Disaster Services Director-General Ludwig Kembu were reported to inspect the affected areas Sunday.
Downer said the federal government stood ready to consider further requests for assistance from the PNG government.
The planes were due to arrive Sunday night and fly out to the devastated region Monday morning.
However, he said that how quickly the medical crew could get to work would depend on whether the landing strip at Wanimo was long enough for the C130s to land and the possibility of further earthquakes.
The massive tidal wave wiped seven villages off the map, leaving hundreds people dead or missing.
The disaster occurred 30 minutes after an undersea earthquake of about 7.0 on the Richter scale took place.
Dalle said it was impossible to say how many people were missing.
Two Hercules aircraft left the Richmond airforce base, north-west of Sydney, in the afternoon, while another plane took off from Townsville.
"The latest death toll for the district is 599," Dickson Dalle, chairman of district disaster coordinating, was quoted as telling reporters.
Defense ministry spokesman Colonel Keith Jobson said that even when the planes touched down at the airstrip, the defense personnel would still have to use helicopters or road transport to access the stricken villages.
Another five people died in the Teles-Lambu villages.