Students and citizens in the country have held various demonstrations recently, urging the government to bring Soeharto to court on the charges of corruption, collusion and nepotism during his 32-year rule.
Meanwhile, Chairman of the National Mandate Party Amien Rais urged the government to put Soeharto under city arrest and to confiscate his wealth and that of his family and cronies.
After an uncertain response to wide calls for a thorough investigation into the wealth of Soeharto, his family and friends, the dominant Golkar (Functional Group) faction has finally changed its position, saying that it strongly supports the wealth probe.
The time has come to bring economic and political criminals to court," he said after installing the executive board of the party's chapter in Lampung Province on Tuesday.
addressing a gathering on Sunday at the Bogor Institute of Agriculture in Bogor, about 60 kilometers south of the capital, Indonesian Moslem leader Amien Rais has asked Soeharto to donate his wealth to the nation and also called on Indonesians to forgive the former president who had made great contribution to the country.
During the 32 year rule of Soeharto, Golkar had been in the government bandwagon, given an amen to virtually all the regime's policies and whims.
This is the first time that demonstrators stage their action near the residence of Soeharto who resigned on May 21 amid anti-government demonstrations and bloody rioting in the country.
"With this letter of authorization, I can go anywhere in the world to search accounts that may be held by Soeharto," Ghalib was quoted by the newspaper The Indonesian Observer Tuesday as saying.
JAKARTA, June 9 (Xinhua) -- The office of Indonesia's attorney general has formed a team to investigate the wealth of present and former Indonesian government officials, a spokesman of the office said here Tuesday.
"We would not take the initiative (to launch the investigation), it has to come from the country of origin of the person (suspected of having illegally-gained deposits)," he added.
It said it would be more relevant if the call for the probe into the riches of the former president and his family was made part of the decree on corruption, collusion and nepotism.
Commenting on the stand of the Golkar on the subject, the Jakarta Post said, "This is another display of their halfhearted commitment to clean up corruption.
The offices of the attorney general, chief public prosecutor and public prosecutor have asked the public to provide information about the wealth of officials to help the team in its investigations, the spokesman said.
Attorney General Soedjono C. Atmonegoro said last week that the government has started an investigation into the wealth of former government officials, including former President Soeharto and his family.
"The result (of the investigations) of officials of both central and provincial governments will be announced to the public," Spokesman Barman Zahir said.
He said the special team tasked to investigate the former president has already scheduled a meeting with Soeharto.
Addressing a plenary meeting on Wednesday, Golkar spokesperson Marwah Daud Ibrahim said the implementation of a clean government, with no traces of corruption, collusion and nepotism, is a prerequisite to achievement of the aims of the 1945 proclamation.
Fonjallaz denied that the investigation into Soeharto's wealth was on the agenda during his meeting with the attorney general.
The government prosecutor's office would continue a thorough investigation into the wealth while the land would be seized for the state or returned to its original owners, Hasan said.
The decree on clean governance included a stipulation that the government investigate Soeharto's wealth.
Indonesian Foreign Affairs Minister Ali Alatas said earlier this week that his ministry was ready to assist the Attorney General's Office in rescuing state assets possibly stashed abroad during the Soeharto era.
All five factions of the People's Consultative Assembly (MPR), the country's highest legislative body, agreed to add a provision in a decree on clean governance, preventing centralization of power, corruption, collusion and nepotism.
The faction's spokesman Djuhad Mahja told reporters that they finally agreed with the decree on anti-corruption, collusion and nepotism because the faction's proposal had been accommodated in it.
"We will make the best of this offer... the minister of foreign affairs (Ali Alatas) has also offered to cooperate," Ghalib said.
Soeharto, who had ruled Indonesia for the last 32 years, resigned on May 21 under the heavy pressure from the people demanding for total reforms in political, economic and legal fields.
Meanwhile, according to a survey result by the Indonesian Business Data Center which was published here Monday, the assets of Soeharto's family have reached 200 trillion rupiah (about 20 billion U.S. dollars).
Soeharto, in a speech on the channel controlled by his eldest daughter Siti Hardijanti Rukmana on Sunday, said: "The fact is, I don't have even one cent of savings abroad, don't have accounts at foreign banks... let alone hundreds of billion of dollars."
A team of investigators will soon question Soeharto, Ghalib said without mentioning time and place for the questioning.
JAKARTA, September 22 (Xinhua) -- Indonesian Attorney General Andi M. Ghalib Monday said he would ask former President Soeharto to sign a letter of authorization that would enable the investigation team to probe Soeharto's overseas wealth.
He cited the new decree of the special session of the People's Consultative Assembly from November 10 through November 13.
Should there be indications (that this wealth was amassed illegally), the government will pursue the case and take legal action," he told reporters.
He refused to disclose the details, saying that the investigation needs a long time.
JAKARTA, June 1 (Xinhua) -- Indonesian Attorney General Soedjono C. Atmonegoro said here Monday that an investigation on the wealth of former government officials, including former President Soeharto and his family, was going on.
At least five factories were built there, he said, adding that so far the probe has been focused on Soeharto and his family and has yet to be directed at cronies.
JAKARTA, September 12 (Xinhua) -- Indonesian Attorney General Andi Muhammad Ghalib pledged to hunt state assets which were allegedly stashed overseas during the 32-year rule of former president Soeharto, the Jakarta Post reported Saturday.
He said the team will be led by the junior attorney general for civil and state administrative courts.
He did not say when the results of the investigations will be announced.
But they failed to reach the target point because of tight security precautions at various intersections that lead to the spot, official Antara News Agency reported.
Local and foreign reports have accused Soeharto of amassing wealth illegally during his 32-year reign and stashing the fortune overseas.
The paper quoted State Minister for Land Affairs Hasan Basru Durin as saying ownership of the property would be canceled and sanctions applied if charges were proven.
"It is possible for the government to consider forgiving Soeharto because of his age but his children and cronies should be tried and punished if they are proven guilty," Rais added.
JAKARTA, November 18 (Xinhua) -- The Indonesian National Land Agency's Jambi office has uncovered evidence of former President Soeharto's allegedly ill-gotten wealth in Central Sumatra Province alone, The Jakarta Post reported Wednesday.
The demonstrators in great number moved toward residence of the former president at Jalancendana street in Central Jakarta.
Djuhad Mahja SH of the United Development Party faction made the statement in the Parliament building here Thursday.
"The government is serious in investigating Soeharto's personal fortune.
"We will consult with the Foreign Ministry to rescue the state assets stashed overseas," Ghalib told reporters after meeting Swiss Ambassador to Indonesia Gerard Fonjallaz at his office Friday.
A clause in a decree can easily be ignored, but a specific decree would give the needed impetus to kick start the investigation."
Habibie has promised to carry out the reforms and to be free from corruption, collusion and nepotism.
Article four of the decree states that efforts to eradicate corruption, collusion and nepotism must be made indiscriminately upon any state officials, former state officials, their families and cronies as well as private businessmen, business tycoons and former president Soeharto.
The Indonesian government has set up two teams to investigate alleged corruption by Soeharto as well as his wealth.
Soedjono said that he has assigned junior Attorney General to carry out the investigation.
The purpose of his visit is to explain that Switzerland's banking secrecy is "not absolute" as long as there is a formal demand from a particular country to launch investigations into a suspected bank account, he said.
However, Golkar voiced objections to proposals that the special MPR session adopt a special decree to investigate Soeharto's wealth.
Chief of the Prosecutor's Office in Irian Jaya Province T.H.
"Yes, Soeharto will receive the team soon," Tanjung said.
The new government led by B.J.
The United Development Party faction earlier asked for a separate decree to contain investigation into Soeharto, officials, former officials and their families.
"The law should be upheld if we want reform to go on.
Meanwhile, State Secretary/Minister Akbar Tanjung Monday reiterated the government's seriousness in investigating Soeharto's wealth.
Meanwhile, a legislator claimed that President B.J Habibie needed no new law to start investigation on former president Soeharto, saying that the existing anti-corruption law would do.
Ghalib came under fire after he said on Monday that he believed Soeharto's public denial of charges that he had accumulated a fortune worth billions of U.S. dollars during his rule.
Sidabutar said they were also investigating thousands of hectares of land allegedly belonging to Soeharto, his children and cronies.
Without such a letter, it will be hard for the team to ask foreign banks to open their records due to long-established banking secrecy policies, he added.
A investigation team set up in September announced on Tuesday that some evidence of Soeharto's allegedly ill-gotten wealth has been found in several provinces including land, factories and others.
A prominent crony, Bob Hasan, for instance, apparently held a virtual monopoly on the supply of vegetables, meat, eggs, fruits and various other necessities for employees of PT Freeport Indonesia mining firm in Irian Jaya.
This is the first time Golkar officially declared war against corruption, collusion and nepotism.
JAKARTA, November 13 (Xinhua) -- In an apparent response to mounting demands from students and opposition groups, Indonesian legislators on Friday agreed to launch an investigation into former president Soeharto's wealth.
The team also found Soeharto's personal saving accounts as much as 2.3 million U.S dollars in 72 domestic banks.
Soeharto's fortune, part of which has been sold to his crony and noted businessman Prayogo Pangestu, reportedly comprised stocks, land, a plywood factory, a bank, a pineapple cannery and a TV relay station, worth 122.4 billion rupiah (15.3 million U.S. dollars) in all.
However, a foreign media once estimated Soeharto's and his family's fortune is worth 40 billion U.S. dollars.
JAKARTA, November 19 (Xinhua) -- Local people and students in Indonesia's capital Jakarta held an anti-Soeharto mass demonstration, starting at 14:00 local time on Thursday.
American magazine Forbes estimated in July that Soeharto, who stepped down amid mounting public pressure on May 21, had a fortune worth 4 billion U.S. dollars.
But Soeharto, who stepped down amid mounting public pressure on May 21, swore that he did not have any deposits abroad in a statement broadcast by his own daughter's television station early this month.