China will inform Russia at any moment of the latest situation, to enable the latter to make quick and timely responses, the spokesman said.
Zhang, asked at the meeting to respond to the public concern over the water poison accident that occurred in northeast China's Songhua River, vowed to take tougher measures to reduce the emission of pollutants.
China and Russia have both pledged to cooperate closely to handle the pollution of the Songhua River in northeast China's Heilongjiang Province, said Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Liu Jianchao here Thursday.
Measures already taken by the local governments include blocking the entry of pollutants, discharging more water from two reservoirs to dilute the pollutants, organizing experts to study control measures and enhancing monitoring work, part of the environmental emergency response mechanism activated shortly after the explosion.
Since the river was contaminated in a chemical plant explosion in the neighboring Jilin Province on November 13, the benzene and nitrobenzene density in the water is declining gradually after days of sedimentation and adsorption, and the Harbin city government has added a large amount of active carbon powders into the river to help clean up the water.
The Jilin and Heilongjiang provincial governments have activated their contingency programs for environmental incidents, and have taken measures to ensure the safety of potable water, said the official.
According to the official, observation data shows the degree of river water pollution has been declining.
China is now making every effort to strengthen the monitoring and control of water quality of the Songhua River with the hope of minimizing the possible hazards, Liu said.
The operation of the city's water supply system was temporarily resumed on Wednesday afternoon following a forecast by China's State Environmental Protection Administration (SEPA) that the polluted water will not reach the city until Thursday.
The toxic benzene-contaminated water, flowing down from the upper reaches of Songhua, arrived at the local water supply inlet at about 5 a.m., and has now entered river sections across the city's urban areas, according to the Heilongjiang provincial environment protection bureau.
Russia expressed appreciation of China's information, said Liu, adding that China will further strengthen the monitoring of the pollution situation and the level of pollutants in the river.
Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Liu Jianchao said in Beijing on Thursday that China has informed Russia of the water pollution situation in the river, a tributary of the Heilong River (called Amur River in Russia) on the border between the Russian far east and China.
The SEPA confirmed the "major pollution" of the Songhua River on Wednesday.
The State Council has dispatched an expert group, headed by director of the National Bureau of Production Safety Supervision and Administration Li Yizhong, to Harbin to handle the accident.
The massive floating pollutants traversing the Harbin section of northeast China's Songhua River is unlikely to cause big troubles to the city's rural areas,  according to a senior hydrologist.
On the morning of Nov. 24, the State Environmental Protection Administration (SEPA) elaborated the details of the pollution to the Russian embassy in China, including various test results.
The Songhua River is a tributary of the Heilong River (called Amur River in Russia) on the border between the Russian far east and China.
China's State Environmental Protection Administration (SEPA) said here on Wednesday that the Songhua River in northeast China suffered a major water pollution incident owing to the explosion of a petrochemical plant at the upper reaches.
The Songhua River, a tributary of the Heilongjiang River which is called the Amur when it crosses the border, is contaminated by benzene due to a massive petrochemical plant explosion on November 13.
He said the polluted water in the Songhua River, which reached Heilongjiang provincial capital Harbin on Thursday morning, is expected to flow into the Heilongjiang River (called the Amur River in Russia) on the Sino-Russian border in around 14 days judging from the current flow speed.
He said Jilin had quickly blocked entry of the pollutants into the river and discharged water from a reservoir to dilute pollutants in the river.
BEIJING, Nov. 24 (Xinhua) -- China pledged on Thursday it will try its utmost to minimize the impact of northeast China's Songhua River pollution on the neighboring Russia, including intensifying monitoring and water quality control measures.
The content of nitrobenzene in the polluted water exceeded the national safe standard by 29.9 times and that of benzene 2.6 times when it passed Zhaoyuan from Nov. 20 to 22.
The municipal government of Harbin has notified local residents about the coming pollution so that people have enough time to store water.
The river is the main source of drinking water supply to Harbin, a city of more than 3 million people.
Judging from the current flowing speed, it would take four days for the polluted block to flow out of the urban area of Harbin, where tap water supply has been suspended.
The blast at the Jilin Petroleum and Chemical Company, which is located by the bank of the Songhua River, set off a series of explosions that leveled two of the plant's fuel towers where highly flammable gas benzene was being processed on Nov. 13.
When the polluted water flowed further downstream, the content of nitrobenzene was reduced further to only about 10.7 times of above the national standard and that of benzene 0.08 times of the national standard, he said.
The blast of the petrochemical plant happened about 350 kilometer away from the China-Russia boundary.
Premier Wen Jiabao has ordered the environmental department and regional governments to take effective measures to guarantee the safety of potable water, beefing up monitoring work and providing accurate information.
"China is very concerned about the possible hazards to Russia and has informed its neighbor several times of the pollution," Foreign Ministry spokesman Liu Jianchao said at a press conference.
"After the explosion at the Jilin Petrochemical Company under China National Petroleum Corporation, our observation showed pollutants containing benzene had flown into the Songhua River and caused water pollution," said an official with SEPA.
SEPA has incorporated the pollution-reduction measures China's major rivers, including the Songhua and Huanghe rivers, into the country's eleventh five-year economic and social development program, which means putting the task as one of the country's top concerns, said Zhang.
A top official with China's environmental watchdog said Thursday that the company overseeing a chemical plant where an explosion spewed lethal chemicals into a river in the country's northeast should be held responsible for the pollution.
A spokesman for the Heilongjiang provincial government said that the poisonous organic substances, mainly high-density benzene and nitrobenzene flowing down the Songhua River, will arrive in this provincial capital early Thursday.
China has informed Russia of the water pollution situation in the country's northeastern Songhua River, Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Liu Jianchao said here on Thursday.
Benzene-like organic pollutants, harmful to human health, had flown into the river after the blast, with the swath of polluted water stretching about 80 kilometers by Nov. 21.
The finance department of the Heilongjiang provincial government has allocated 10 million yuan (approximately 1.23 million US dollars) specially for handling the pollution incident, said the official.
Zhang said as the polluted water flows downstream, the density of pollutants has markedly subsided.
Huo Yinlong, a monitor at the river, told Xinhua that the water pollution can not be distinguished by sight and there is no irritating smell emanating from the pollution.
It has compelled cities along the river to suspend water taking from the river for various periods.
The enlarged water current would not only help dilute pollution in the river, but also slowed down freezing of the river water downstream.
The plant was run by the Jilin Petroleum and Chemical Company, which is under the state-owned China National Petroleum Corp. _ the country's largest oil company.
Several river monitoring stations reported that benzene density in the front strip of the pollutants was 28.56 times of the national standard as of 4:00 p.m. Wednesday, the spokesman said.
The Songhua River suffered a major water pollution incident as a result of an explosion on Nov. 13 at a petrochemical plant in Jilin Province, where the river originates.
The discharging move was made with the approval by the State Flood Control and Drought Relief Headquarters.
So far, local officials have dispatched work groups to patrol along the river to enforce the governor's order.
Experts estimate that around 100 tons of pollutants containing benzene has flown into the Songhua River, caused by a Nov. 13 explosion at an upstream chemical plant of the Jilin Petrochemical Company under the China National Petroleum Corp.
A petrochemical plant blast that occurred two weeks ago spilled large amount of benzene liquids into the Songhua River, resulting in heavy pollution in the section of Harbin, capital of the Heilongjiang province.
Currently, the water supply has been cut off in Harbin, capital of northeast China's Heilongjiang Province, as the city's water source, Songhua River, has been heavily polluted.
The official said upon receiving the report, the administration immediately sent experts to Heilongjiang Province to assist local pollution-control efforts.
The toxic contents in the water are declining gradually after days of sedimentation, experts said, citing water monitoring statistics.
The flow is expected to return to 600 cubic meters per second in the evening.
Yin Fazhang, deputy chief engineer of the Heilongjiang Provincial Hydrological Bureau, said that nearly 90 percent of residents living along the downstream section in Harbin rely on underground water as their source of drinking water.
The Nov. 13 blast in Jilin, a city in Jilin province, caused massive amounts of benzene, a toxic, flammable liquid to flow into the Songhua River.
The Fengman Hydropower Station in the upper reach of Songhua River increased the daily discharge amount from 600 cubic meters per second to 1,000 cubic meters per second starting from 10:00 a.m. Thursday.
"It is the chemical plant of the CNPC in Jilin province."
The front of the polluted water of Songhua River in northeast China reached Harbin, capital of Heilongjiang Province, on early Thursday morning, local environment authority said.
The two countries are setting concrete arrangements to open a hot line for better contact and communication over the water problem.
The pollutants, stretching around 80 kilometers long, will be further diluted after they pass Harbin in around 40 hours as several major tributaries are to join the Songhua River.
Meanwhile, the Nierji Hydropower Station on the river also enlarged the discharging flow from 20 cubic meters per second to 120 cubic meters per second.
On Wednesday, the State Council set a target of combating environmental degradation for the next 15 years.
Two reservoirs on the Songhua River on Thursday reinforced water discharge to dilute a massive slick of chemical pollutants floating through this capital of northeast China's Heilongjiang.
Governor of the province Zhang Zuoji on Thursday warned locals as well as animal husbandry against using water from the polluted Songhua River.
Zhang Lijun, deputy director general of SEPA said China would keep Russia informed at all times about the monitoring results of the polluted stretches of Songhua River.
Liu said China was very concerned about possible hazards to Russia and has informed its neighbor several times of the pollution.
A major chemical explosion at Jilin Petrochemical Company 380 kilometers up the Songhua river on November 13 had sent massive amounts of benzene into the waterway.
Harbin, home to nine million population including 3.8 million in the urban districts, has cut off water supply in the urban areas since early Wednesday, an emergency action taken to ensure public safety.
"The two sides are making specific arrangements for opening a hotline for the matter," said Zhang Lijun, deputy director of SEPA.
At another press conference Thursday, a senior official with China's State Environmental Protection Administration (SEPA) said the Chinese side will keep informing the Russian side of what it has learnt from our monitoring.
Zhang did not give any more details but said investigators were looking into criminal responsibility.
He said the pollutant strip will flow out of Harbin Saturday morning.
As the public has been informed timely, no human being has been harmed, said the SEPA official.
Quality of the river water is under close observation for 24 hours every day.
Residents in Harbin cleared shelves of water, soft drinks and milk this week after the water system was shut down on Tuesday.
The 80-kilometer-long (50-mile-long) swathe of chemicals moved downstream into Harbin, a city of 3.8 million people in neighboring Heilongjiang province, on Thursday, prompting officials to shut down water supplies.
Harbin, a city of more than 3 million residents, stops drawing water from the Songhua River for four days starting Wednesday.
An 80-kilometer chemical slick has been slowly moving downstream along the Songhua River and reached Harbin on Thursday morning.
Monitoring staff can only take samples to test the pollution density, he said.
Water supplies and active carbon used to purify water are being shipped continuously to the affected areas.
"Both have pledged to cooperate closely to handle the pollution."
By 2020, China's environmental quality and ecological status should be improved remarkably, according to the plan.
"We will be very clear about who's responsible," Zhang Lijun, deputy director of the State Environmental Protection Administration, said at a press conference.
The drifting polluted block is unlikely to cause too much inconvenience in their daily life, he added.
Chinese leaders have shown keen concern over the incident.
China shut down 2,682 companies discharging liquid waste among 420,000 inspected between last May and September, Zhang Lijun, deputy director of the State Environmental Protection Administration(SEPA) told a press conference held here Thursday.
China focus: China pledges to minimize impact of river pollution on Russia
Some has deposited and some has been absorbed along the way.
Zhang said the government will step up crackdown on polluting enterprises, noting 2,682 polluting plants have been shut down from May last year to September this year.
Songhua River will carry poisonous substances to Harbin, a major city in northeast China, at round 5:00 a.m. Thursday, an official said at a press conference Wednesday afternoon.
Harbin, which is under a 4-day water supply cut-off, has taken measures to ensure public safety and a safe drinking water supply.
It also organized environmental, water conservancy and chemical experts to discuss pollution control plans, and beefed up monitoring work.
Benzene is a substance harmful to human health.
Within this period, China put 23,000 cases on file, closed 2,682 companies and asked 1,750 to stop production for treatment.
Families also stocked up by filling bathtubs and buckets.
163 people responsible for major environment pollution events received punishment, Zhang said.
By Tian Sulei, Wang Jingzhong and Wang Jiangang