A judge heard motions Friday from lawyers for the two brothers, Deepak Kalpoe, 21, and Satish Kalpoe, 18, and a Dutch youth, Joran Van Der Sloot, 17 -- the three prime suspects in the case, who were the last people known to have seen Holloway before she disappeared in the wee hours of May 30.
Van der Sloot is the father of 17-year-old Joran van der Sloot, one of the last people seen with 18-year-old Natalee Holloway the night she disappeared.
Still accompanied by police, the group went to a couple of places looking for van der Sloot before returning to the father's house and finding Joran van der Sloot there with one of the two Surinamese brothers who later were detained, she said.
Van der Sloot is the son of Paul van der Sloot, of the Netherlands, who is training to be a judge in Aruba.
A judge was expected to rule Thursday on a petition from the official, Paul van der Sloot, to see 17-year-old Joran van der Sloot in jail.
Three suspects -- Joran Van Der Sloot, 17, the son of a prominent judicial official, and brothers Satish Kalpoe, 18, and Deepak Kalpoe, 21 -- are still being held and are now the focus of an intensifying investigation into the disappearance of the girl.
But Tuesday, John said Deepak Kalpoe told him in jail this weekend that he and his brother dropped Van Der Sloot and Holloway off at the Marriott hotel before they went home.
Van Der Sloot is the son of a Dutch judge.
Authorities have not released the results of the search, but Attorney General Caren Janssen has said that Paul van der Sloot is not under investigation.
The two brothers have told police that they and Joran were with Holloway and that she and the Dutch youth were petting in the back seat of their car.
Police -- including what appeared to be forensic investigators in protective clothing -- searched the family home of Joran Van Der Sloot, the 17-year-old son of Judge Paul Van Der Sloot.
NOORD, Aruba (AP) _ Police on Thursday searched for clues into the disappearance of an Alabama teen a day after conducting a late-night helicopter flyover of the Dutch Caribbean island and seizing items from the home of a Dutch justice official whose son was with her the day she went missing.
Van der Sloot's father, Aruban judge-in-training Paul van der Sloot, said his son was out playing poker when the group first arrived at the house around 1 a.m., Bearman said.
Judge Bob Wit, who was sent in from the neighboring Dutch island of Curacao, extended the detention of Joran van der Sloot, 17, and brothers, Deepak Kalpoe, 21, and Satish Kalpoe, 18, for eight days, said Mariaine Croes, who is not related to the fourth detainee.
The men were arrested Thursday in connection with the disappearance of Natalee Holloway, who they said they last saw in front of the Holiday Inn shortly before 2 a.m. on May 30.
The Associated Press reported that Croes might have known one of the suspects, Deepak Kalpoe, through meeting him at an internet cafe, but the spokeswoman for the prosecutor, Mariaine Croes declined to comment on that.
Joran remains in police custody with two other young men in the May 30 disappearance of Natalee Holloway, 18.
On Saturday night -- in a scene that seemed to sum up every bizarre aspect of the investigation and press frenzy -- TV crews chased Paulus Van Der Sloot, a judge, and the father of one of four detained suspects in the case, Joran Van Der Sloot, 17.
Paul van der Sloot, a judge-in-training on the island, was questioned Saturday night, said Police Superintendent Jan van der Straaten.
On Wednesday, investigators towed two vehicles and searched the premises of the van der Sloot home in Noord, outside the capital of Oranjestad.
Two of the suspects, identified as Surinamese brothers Satish and Deepak Kaploe, told police Natalee had been drinking and fell down as she got of the car in front of the hotel, the source told The Associated Press on condition of anonymity.
On Friday, a judge ruled on a petition from the elder van der Sloot to visit his son, whom he has not been allowed to see since Joran was detained on June 9, and from the Kalpoes' attorneys requesting to see any evidence prosecutors may have gathered, Croes said.
On Friday, a judge ruled on a petition from the elder van der Sloot to visit his son, whom he has not been allowed to see since Joran was detained on June 9, and from the Kalpoes' attorneys requesting to see any evidence prosecutors may have gathered, Croes said.
Van der Sloot and the Surinamese brothers _ Deepak Kalpoe, 21, and Satish Kalpoe, 18 _ were interrogated by police the next day and released.
Also Thursday, a judge postponed to Friday a ruling on a petition from the justice official, Paul van der Sloot, to see his jailed 17-year-old son, Joran, said Attorney General Caren Janssen.
"After talking to enough people, we were able to deduce that it was Joran van der Sloot," she said.
The search came shortly after Paul Van Der Sloot filed a motion in court Wednesday morning seeking permission to see his jailed son, who along with brothers Deepak Kalpoe, 21, and Satish Kalpoe, 18, are the last known people to have seen Holloway.
Two one-time security guards were taken into custody because van der Sloot and the brothers said they saw Holloway outside the hotel with a security guard, but both have since been released.
The elder Van Der Sloot was coming out of the downtown Oranjestad police station, where he had been brought for questioning in connection with the case.
Almost a week after arresting the son of a prominent Dutch judge in the disappearance of Alabama teen Natalee Holloway, officials in Aruba searched his home Wednesday.
In Alabama, a friend of Holloway's family said Natalee's relatives, not Aruban police, first identified and located Joran and the Kalpoe brothers _ less than a day after the young woman disappeared, and only three hours after family members started looking.
In Alabama, a friend of Holloway's family said Natalee's relatives, not Aruban police, first identified and located Joran and the Kalpoe brothers _ less than a day after the young woman disappeared, and only three hours after family members started looking.
And three weeks into the search for Holloway there are no clear signs the mystery of the missing teen, not seen since the early morning hours of May 30, is about to be solved -- nor are Aruba's image woes.
Those are the same suspicions prosecutors have used to hold three suspects who have been in custody for eleven days: Joran Van Der Sloot, 17, and brother Deepak Kalpoe, 21, and Satish Kalpoe, 18.
"She had been missing less than 24 hours and we had all three names and addresses, so it's just disappointing that they (authorities) weren't able to move faster," Jody Bearman, who organized the graduation trip and went to Aruba to help in the search, said in an interview with the AP on Friday.
"She had been missing less than 24 hours and we had all three names and addresses, so it's just disappointing that they (authorities) weren't able to move faster," Jody Bearman, who organized the graduation trip and went to Aruba to help in the search, said in an interview with the AP on Friday.
She was last seen by friends leaving the Oranjestad nightclub Carlos 'N Charlie's with Van Der Sloot and the Kalpoe brothers.
On Wednesday, investigators searched the van der Sloot home in Noord, outside the capital, Oranjestad, and towed away two vehicles.
Asked why it took investigators more than two weeks after Holloway's disappearance to search the van der Sloot home, Janssen said Thursday, "You have to build up an investigation.
It was not immediately clear why van der Sloot had not been allowed to see his son or whether the youth's mother had been allowed to.
"We are in day 18 with no answers," she said Friday.
But Antonius "Mickey" John, a former hotel security guard released from custody on Sunday, told reporters that Deepak Kalpoe told him during a chat in jail that he and his brother actually dropped the young van der Sloot and Holloway off together near the Marriott, about 10 blocks north of the Holiday Inn.
The three young men have been in custody since June 9.
Bearman said the group also was told that Holloway's friends had seen the same teenager in the casino at the hotel where they were staying.
Natalee Holloway's family, not Aruban police, first identified and located a Dutch youth now held as a suspect in the disappearance of the Alabama teen, according to a friend who helped with the search.
A fourth man, a tour boat disc jockey, was arrested Friday as the latest suspect in the case of missing Alabama teen Natalee Holloway.
Van der Sloot, from Holland, is training to be a judge in Aruba, a Dutch Caribbean island.
Van der Sloot claimed he left Holloway outside the Holiday Inn resort where the group was staying after they took a late-night trip to a scenic lighthouse, Bearman said, and he even accompanied the family to the hotel to show them the exact spot where she was dropped off.
The three were questioned and released shortly after Holloway's May 30 disappearance.
In an interview Friday with The Associated Press, Bearman said Aruban authorities couldn't be faulted completely for failing to identify van der Sloot and the others more quickly, something she said the amateur sleuths did in less than three hours in Aruba.
"The search is part of the investigation," said Mariaine Croes, a spokeswoman for Attorney General Caren Janssen.
Lawyers for van der Sloot and brothers Deepak Kalpoe, 21, and Satish Kalpoe, 18, of Suriname, also filed legal motions Wednesday asking to see the evidence against their clients.
Accompanied by her husband and friends including Bearman on a donated corporate jet, Holloway Twitty had a few bits of information from Mountain Brook graduates who were on the trip, most importantly a physical description of a Dutch teenager _ a judge's son, they thought _ with whom Natalee was seen leaving a bar, Carlos' N Charlies', on May 30, the night she disappeared.
"There is a chance we'll have more suspects, but it's impossible to speculate now because we are still investigating," said the attorney general's spokeswoman.
ATHLETICS: World-record holder Powell receives hero's welcome in Jamaica
The elder Van Der Sloot was called into police headquarters again Sunday for questioning and was released.
He told Wiggins that he knew one of the Kalpoe brothers because he went to the same Internet cafe, Wiggins said.
He told Wiggins that he knew one of the Kalpoe brothers because he went to the same Internet cafe, Wiggins said.
A judge on Saturday ordered the teen son of a prominent justice official and his two friends to stay in jail for at least a week more while investigators continue their search for clues in the disappearance of a young U.S. woman.
Natalee Holloway, 18, of Mountain Brook, Alabama, disappeared in the early hours of May 30, the last day of a five-day vacation with 124 other students to celebrate their high school graduation.
A fourth man detained in the case was to appear before a judge Monday, said Attorney General spokeswoman Mariaine Croes.
"There is a chance we'll have more suspects, but it's impossible to speculate now because we are still investigating," Mariaine Croes said Saturday.
She said if there is not significant progress soon in the case, she may start to believe that authorities are protecting the detainees.
"We started pressing him on that because we had students who were in the lobby until 5 a.m., and she never arrived," she said.
The detainees initially said they took Holloway to a beach on the northern part of the island then dropped her off at her Holiday Inn hotel, where they claimed she was approached by a security guard.
More than two weeks after 18-year-old Alabama resident Natalee Holloway went missing, numerous searches by authorities, volunteer islanders and tourists have led nowhere, and no one has been charged in the case.
Holloway, of Mountain Brook, Alabama, disappeared in the early hours of May 30, the last day of a five-day vacation with 124 students celebrating their high school graduation.
Police Superintendent Jan van der Straaten refused to identify Croes by name Friday but said that the latest detainee was arrested based on information provided by one of the three young men already in custody.
The three young men weren't taken into custody until 10 days after Holloway's family first knew of them.
The three young men weren't taken into custody until 10 days after Holloway's family first knew of them.
"She had been missing less than 24 hours and we had all three names and addresses, so it's just disappointing that they weren't able to move faster," said Jody Bearman, who organized the graduation trip to Aruba for 125 students from Mountain Brook High School and seven chaperones.
No one has been charged in the case, and lawyers for all three men say they are innocent.
On Saturday a judge ordered the Dutch teenager and his two friends, brothers Deepak Kalpoe, 21, and Satish Kalpoe, 18, to stay in jail for at least another week while investigators continue their search for clues.
Mariaine Croes, a spokeswoman for the attorney general's office in Aruba, declined comment Saturday on how authorities initially learned of the three suspects.
Mariaine Croes declined comment Saturday on how authorities initially learned of the three young men.
The trio initially told investigators they dropped Holloway off at her Holiday Inn hotel at about 2 a.m. May 30 and last saw her being approached by a security guard.
Croes is not related to Mariaine Croes.
Following the approximately four-hour search, Janssen, the attorney general, clarified that Paul van der Sloot was not under investigation.
Police questioned the father of a Dutch teenager detained in connection with the case of a missing American teenager, hoping he may have seen something to help resolve the mystery, officials said Sunday.
Croes said he was contacted by police Thursday night and went to the station voluntarily to give a statement, his employer, Marcus Wiggins, told The Associated Press.
Jan van der Straaten told The Associated Press that they used the helicopter "to search for possible remains _ but found nothing."
Three young men who acknowledged partying with an 18-year-old honors student from Alabama before she went missing last week told police that a man dressed in a security uniform approached her as they dropped her off at her hotel, a source close to the investigation said Thursday.
The family's amateur detective work _ based on a combination of hunches and tips on the Caribbean island _ also led to two of the youth's friends who also were taken into custody.
He was arrested early Friday, a day after being contacted by police and giving them a statement, "Tattoo" owner Marcus Wiggins told The Associated Press on Friday.
She said if there is not significant progress soon, she may start to believe that authorities are protecting them.
The missing girl's mother, who refuses to leave the island until she learns her daughter's fate, said she is unhappy with the progress of the investigation.
Powell, who set the record in the 100 meters Tuesday, is confident that he can beat his mark of 9.77 seconds.
Powell broke the record at the Tsiklitiria Super Grand Prix meet in Athens, Greece.
An employer of Croes said the disc jockey knew one of the Surinamese brothers through an Internet cafe.
Wiggins did not comment on Croes' possible involvement in Natalee Holloway's disappearance.
On Sunday, the family of missing Alabama teen Natalee Holloway searched the caves on the southwest corner of this island in Arikok National Park, while in downtown Oranjestad life was slower than
They have not been charged with any crime.
Police launched a new search for a missing Alabama teenager Tuesday after a man detained earlier in the investigation said another suspect told him in jail the girl was not taken back to her hotel.
Three other men have been arrested.
The attorney general's spokeswoman, Mariaine Croes, said witnesses are questioned when prosecutors believe they may be able to add something to the case.
"Once we got the name we were able to track the address through people and we got the police.
Also at Wednesday's hearing, defense attorneys filed motions to see the evidence warranting the continued incarceration of their clients, and prosecutors sought the removal of lawyer Antonio Carlo, who is representing Joran Van Der Sloot.
Van der Sloot described dancing with Holloway at the bar and said "she wanted to go with me" at closing time, according to Bearman.
Joran remains in police custody along with Deepak Kalpoe, 21, and Satish Kalpoe, 18, of Suriname.
Lejuez said the stories of the three suspects in custody are beginning to change because authorities "have stepped up the speed of the interrogations."
Authorities have not released the results of the search.
A helicopter equipped with infrared technology searched unsuccessfully for the body of a missing American teenager, an official said Thursday, as investigators sifted through items seized from the island home of a justice official whose son was with the young woman the night she disappeared.
Holloway was celebrating her graduation from Mountain Brook, Ala., High School with 124 other students and seven chaperons when she vanished during the early hours of May 30.
Holloway was celebrating her graduation from Mountain Brook, Alabama, High School with 124 other students and seven chaperones when she vanished during the early hours of May 30.
Her disappearance, unsolved despite scores of searches of the island by volunteers and police, has increasingly become a source of discord on the island, where the slogan on auto tags is "One Happy Island."
After the three young men were detained, the attorney general's office said Dutch law permits parents to see minors in jail.
In the past week authorities released the first two suspects arrested in the case, then arrested a fourth Friday.
"Sure, we have shark places on the northern side, but they have nothing to do with the investigation," he said.
Although they were later taken into custody, no one has been charged.
"We have to wait for the investigation to finish," she said.
"We have to wait for the investigation to finish," she said.
Janssen declined to say whether the judge was considering other petitions related to the case.
Holloway Twitty has said that if investigators do not make progress soon, she might start believing they are trying to protect the detainees.
When he left (the home Friday) he said, 'I will be back this afternoon.'
He was identified by his boss as Steve Gregory Croes, a 26-year-old disc jockey on the party boat "Tattoo."
Croes said he knew one of two Surinamese brothers being held in the case because they went to the same Internet cafe, Wiggins said.
Attorney General Caren Janssen said the judge considering the petitions is from Curacao, and a court there would rule sometime Thursday.
The attorney general's office released a statement Friday identifying Croes' only by his initials, S.G.C., age 26.
Holloway was on the last day of a five-day graduation trip with 124 classmates and seven adult chaperons from Mountain Brook High School in Birmingham to this Dutch Caribbean island.
Holloway Twitty, 44, has insisted that Joran and the Kalpoes hold the key to the investigation and that authorities pressure the young men harder to tell the truth.
Holloway Twitty, 44, has insisted that Joran and the Kalpoes hold the key to the investigation and that authorities pressure the young men harder to tell the truth.
Holloway Twitty remarked Friday that Croes' arrest was "just the beginning," and that she believed more people might be brought into custody.
"This case is not that hard to figure out," Beth Holloway Twitty said.
"I can run you through the list of things we've been misportrayed of, fantastical things, from a high level government cover-up, to drug cartel, to prostitution and slavery," said Trappenberg."
The prosecution argued that Hendricksen had been grossly negligent when, on Aug. 5, 2004, near Saba Rock, he drove his 17-foot (5-meter) Boston Whaler through a mooring field and hit a dinghy with four young men aboard.
Hendricksen's boat climbed over the dinghy, spilling the youths into the water.
The country's tourism office had cancelled the annual "The Party Goes On Parade" of people dressed in costumes streaming through the streets in a kind of small scale Mardi Gras to attract vacationers in June, the low season for this tropical island in the Caribbean visited by about half a million Americans a year.
BRITISH VIRGIN ISLANDS: Dutch marine engineer found guilty of manslaughter in boat accident
Hendricksen then left the scene, ignoring the cries for help, said public prosecutor Terrence Williams.
BARNET, Vt. (AP) _ Three officials from Cuba circled around the four young Jersey heifers in a barn in Vermont, more than 2,000 miles from their Caribbean homeland.
Hendricksen, 40, pleaded innocent and remains on bail pending sentencing next week.
The way I'm running this season, it's given me a lot of confidence," Powell, 22, said shortly after arriving at Norman Manley International Airport.
In all, the Cubans plan to purchase 500 head from Vermont, Maine and Pennsylvania.
"I've run 9.8 every time I've been on the track," said Powell, who was met by government officials, including sports minister Portia Simpson Miller, and cheering supporters from his school, the University of Technology.
Through the weekend CNN and FOX -- each with crews of about 10 -- showed few signs of losing interest in the story that continues to spike ratings even though government officials and lawyers offer few comments or details of the investigation.
"In today's economic order, our countries are utilized for exploitation but excluded from development."
"I decided that instead of waiting, I would come here.
WASHINGTON (AP) _ The indefinite holding of foreign terrorism suspects at Guantanamo Bay is creating new political headaches for President George W. Bush and his allies on Capitol Hill.
Jeffry Scott writes for The Atlanta Journal-Constitution.
Yet she was among tens of thousands of qualified applicants turned away from U.S. nursing programs last year because they do not have the teachers or space.
Jeffrey Scott writes for The Atlanta Journal-Constitution.
Jeffry Scott writes for The Atlanta Journal-Constitution.
American entrepreneur Robert Ross inaugurated the International University of Nursing on Wednesday, inspired by staffing shortages that are forcing nurses to work overtime in hospitals from the United States to Japan.
The US$10 million (euro8.3 million) institution, surrounded by sugar cane fields and overlooking the Caribbean sea, accepted 200 students for the autumn semester and aims to enroll 3,000 by 2008.
GUANTANAMO: Detention of terror suspects poses rising challenge to Bush and allies in Congress
Jeffry Scott writes for The Atlanta Journal-Constitution.
"He has lived here about three months with his grandparents," Croes said.
The tabloid TV show "A Current Affair" plans to air an entire program on Aruba on Monday.
ROAD TOWN, British Virgin Islands (AP) _ A British Virgin Islands jury has found a Dutch marine engineer, whose powerboat rammed into a dinghy and killed two teenagers, guilty on two counts of manslaughter.
They are extremely concerned about Natalee and her family, but everybody is affected.
The parade gave the wrong impression Aruba officials still place promoting tourism as a top priority, said Trappenberg, and it would have put about 300 officers on streets to manage crowds and traffic.
As FOX and CNN have pushed to scoop each they have both made missteps.
Castro complained of a global economic system he said defends the interests of an opulent minority while pushing out all others.
How many people have gone missing in the U.S. in the last three weeks?"
His wife, Anita Van Der Sloot, said Friday her husband duty's as a lower level judge have been suspended during the the investigation; but that could not be confirmed Sunday through officials.
While Aruban police were present during the questioning of van der Sloot, which lasted until about 3 a.m., officers left the talking to Holloway's family until things began to get "heated," Bearman said.
With help from some locals, Holloway's mother and the others determined the youth had been in the casino playing in a poker tournament, according to Bearman.
Holloway was celebrating her graduation from Mountain Brook High School, near Birmingham, Alabama, with 124 other students and seven chaperones when she vanished during the early hours of May 30.
The search for Holloway was still under way on Saturday.
He was arrested early Friday, a day after giving police a statement, "Tattoo" owner Marcus Wiggins said Friday.
The three weren't taken into custody until 10 days after Holloway's family knew of them.
"I don't know what that rule might be," Trapenberg said after the hearing.
He will next compete in Jamaica's National Championships to select the country's squad for the World Championships in Helsinki, Finland, in August.
KINGSTON, Jamaica (AP) _ World record holder Asafa Powell arrived to a hero's welcome when he returned to Jamaica this week.
The father of her three-year old son, he doesn't smoke, he doesn't drink, and he is a gentle.
John's attorney, Noraina C. Pietersz, said she had copies of the Kalpoe brothers' statements given to police, but authorities would not let her read the statement given by Van Der Sloot.
Van der Straaten declined to give details on what they found.
Aruban authorities have defended their work in the nearly three weeks since Holloway failed to show up for the trip home to Alabama.
John said he passed the information on to police.
On Wednesday, investigators brought in from Holland and police using a German Shepherd searched the van der Sloots' one-story, yellow-beige home, where Joran lived in an attached apartment.
A fourth detained man was to appear before a judge Monday, said Croes.
We are not Pirates of the Caribbean."
The suspects then drove off, and did not see Natalie again, they told police, according to the source.
The judge did not immediately rule on the motions.
"He was questioned as a witness, no more or no less," van der Straaten told The Associated Press, declining to give details.
The three young men, who today will have been in custody for a week, were loaded into vehicles hidden from view and driven away.
On Monday, the latest suspect, tour boat disc jockey Steve Croes, 26, is expected to come before a judge who will rule whether prosecutors have enough information to hold him on suspicion of premeditated murder, murder, and kidnapping with fatal consequence.
Holloway disappeared the day she was to return from a five-day trip with 124 other students celebrating their graduation from high school in Mountain Brook, Ala., a suburb of Birmingham.
The man, identified by his aunt as Steve Gregory Croes, 26, was questioned and remains in jail.
He declined to say where the helicopter searched or whether authorities believed there was a body to find.
She did not elaborate, however, and also declined to say what she knew about Croes.
Holloway Twitty remarked Friday that Croes' arrest was "just the beginning," and that she believed additional people might be brought into custody.
"We are still busy with the investigation and interrogations of suspects," he said Thursday.
"We are just looking for evidence at the house but have nothing yet," police spokesman Edwin Comemencia said.
The Associated Press contributed to this article.
The Associated Press contributed to this article.
Her mother, Beth Holloway Twitty, has said she will continue to believe Natalee is alive until she has proof otherwise.
Her mother, Beth Holloway Twitty, has said she will continue to believe Natalee is alive until she has proof otherwise.
Van der Straaten declined to give a timeline Thursday on when the investigation could conclude, or when Joran and the Kalpoe brothers might either be released or formally charged.
The man was identified by his boss as Steve Gregory Croes, a 26-year-old disc jockey on the privately owned party boat "Tattoo."
Authorities point to the island's crime statistics -- one murder and six rapes were recorded on Aruba last year -- as an evidence that Holloway's disappearance is out of character for an island renowned as one of the safest places on earth.
"They did not know what was going on," she said.
A fourth suspect, the disc jockey from a party boat, is also in custody.
Janssen, who also went into the house, declined to comment as investigators wrapped up their search at about 4 p.m.
It's not clear how the latest suspect, Steve Croes, is involved.
It was not entirely clear how Croes might be connected to the other detainees.
It was not entirely clear how Croes might be connected to the other detainees.
Aruban authorities have said they are pursuing all leads and protecting no one.
Aruban authorities have said they are pursuing all leads and protecting no one.
The judge also postponed to Friday a ruling on a request from lawyers defending the youth and his two Surinamese friends to see any evidence authorities have gathered, Janssen said.
Security guard Antonius "Mickey" John, 30, who spent nine days in jail as a suspect, said Tuesday that Deepak Kalpoe told him a different story than what he first told police.
ARUBA: Police search for clues of missing U.S. teen after seizing items from young man's home
Aruba's attorney general, Caren Janssen, refused to comment on John's allegation "or anything else."
"You may know something more or you may have seen something more, but you are not a suspect or thought to be part of any crime," said Croes.
A judge must review the case after the first 10 days, and then periodically after that.
In Alabama, a woman who helped organize Holloway's graduation trip, Jody Bearman, said students did not go on the Tattoo as a group, although some could have taken a boat ride without the seven adult chaperons knowing.
They escorted us and we went straight to the house."
As much as the media obsession has distorted perceptions of the island, the authorities reluctance to release information has fueled speculation and disconnect.
Holloway Twitty said she would "believe my daughter is alive until I find out otherwise."
The Cuban leader said much of the economic woes of the developing world can be blamed on consumer-driven societies of the "North," referring primarily to the United States and Europe.
When the third suspect, Dutch citizen Joran Andreas Petrus Van Der Sloot, tried to help her, she refused, saying, "'I can stand on my own,'" the source said.
Pietersz said the trio could not have dropped Holloway off at the Holiday Inn because their vehicle was not captured by hotel surveillance cameras.
The fourth person in custody, Steve Gregory Croes, 26, played music on a tourist party barge called the "Tattoo," but none of the Mountain Brook teens were known to have gone on the boat, Bearman said.
He said he had never seen any of the three young men aboard the "Tattoo," a party boat offering dining, dancing and swimming whose patrons must be 18 and older.
"If he stepped on a lizard, he would cry," she said.
They searched the island by helicopter using infrared technology.
But he conceded the furor over Holloway's disappearance has dented Aruba's image as the safest island in the Caribbean.
Players had to sign in, she said, and that gave them a name and initial: Joran V.
Holloway's passport and packed bags were found in her hotel room.
Powell was one of the favorites to win the gold medal at the Olympics in Athens last summer but finished fifth in the final.
He beat the previous mark of 9.78 set three years ago by American Tim Montgomery.
"How many children have gone missing in the United States in the last month?"
The Marriott is less than a mile north of the Holiday Inn on the same beach.
Kalpoe's lawyer would not comment on John's statement Wednesday, but said his client maintained his innocence.
Police work takes time, they have said.
"We saw something going on and thought this was about Natalee Holloway," said Kelley Meadows.
"Never before has there been so much inequality in the world, and never before has it been so profound," Castro wrote.
"We don't have too much contact with him, because he is so young.
Investigators were refusing to say if they thought Holloway was dead.
Investigators were refusing to say if they thought Holloway was dead.
Terrified after hearing news any parent dreads, Beth Holloway Twitty landed in Aruba about 12 hours after learning her daughter Natalee had vanished.
"This is a place of hospitality, not hostility," he said.
At one point a week ago there were reports of a body found, a stain identified as blood in the automobile Natalee Holloway allegedly rode in, and a confession from one of the suspects.
Elvis Weert, a disc jockey on Aruba Radio Top 95, is one of the most vocal opponents of what he sees as disproportionate coverage of an aberrant incident.
Authorities have refused to say whether they think Holloway is dead.
"The chaperons were not supposed to keep up with their every move," Bearman said.
Aruban authorities have defended their investigation, saying police work takes time.
Aruban authorities have defended their investigation, saying police work takes time.
Police did not impound his automobile, a late model Honda, or remove anything from his home, according to his aunt, Mary Croes.
Her passport and packed bags were found in her room.
Her U.S. passport and packed bags were found in her room.
Her U.S. passport and packed bags were found in her room.
Associated Press reporter Peter Prengaman in Aruba contributed to this report.
HAVANA (AP) _ Cuban President Fidel Castro blasted wealthy consumer societies _ with the United States topping the list _ in a letter regretting his absence at a summit of small developing nations this week in Doha, Qatar.
He highlighted what he called the "ravenous consumption" of oil in the United States, where, despite housing just 5 percent of the world's population, he said more than 26 percent of the planet's oil is consumed.
He dismissed rumors that police may investigate coastal waters on the north side of the island known to have sharks.
Investigators towed two vehicles from the property, a blue SUV and a red Jeep, and removed garbage bags of items while media trained cameras on the modest, one-story yellow stucco home.
You can't just go in there like a cowboy, you have to give certain direction to investigators."
But it ultimately led to frustration when authorities failed to immediately arrest the trio, which included the son of a prominent Dutch ministry official.
Defense attorneys did not return calls seeking comment.
They were formally arrested last Thursday.
Croes was a DJ on the Tattoo, which offers nightly dining, dancing and swimming, Wiggins said.
His story didn't add up, though, according to Bearman.
"Basically we interrogated him," Bearman said.
"It just didn't make any sense, and it never made any sense," she said, characterizing the arrest of her client as "a joke -- they just went off on the wrong case."
It has been a hard week in paradise.
Eds: Associated Press reporter Jay Reeves in Birmingham, Alabama, contributed to this report.
Eds: Associated Press reporter Jay Reeves in Birmingham, Alabama, contributed to this report.
Many locals believe news coverage has been overblown, and others believe Holloway is still alive.
Under Dutch law, which Aruba follows as a Dutch protectorate, authorities can detain individuals for up to 116 days without filing formal charges.
Under Dutch law, which Aruba follows as a Dutch protectorate, authorities can detain people for up to 116 days without charging them.
Aruba follows Dutch law as a former colony in the Netherlands Antilles, from which it seceded in 1986 to become an independent member of the Kingdom of the Netherlands.
CUBA: Fidel Castro blasts consumer societies in letter regretting absence at summit of developing countries
Many Republicans in Congress readily echoed the administration in arguing to keep the prison open, asserting that instances of prisoner abuse were isolated and that many detainees were dangerous individuals bent on harming the United States.
Croes said both cars belonged to the family.
"Nothing like this ever happens and people just don't know how to cope with it.
Agents were seen carrying two white garbage bags filled with items from the house, while authorities towed away a blue sport utility vehicle and a red Jeep from the property in Noord, outside the capital, Oranjestad.
Smith Boulevard, the two-lane road outside the hotel in Palm Beach.
"There were no concrete results from the search yesterday," Croes said Wednesday.
"You don't hear anything about that."
His attorney, Chris Lejuez, said authorities didn't give a reason for his client's release.
Joran lived in an apartment attached to the main house.
Joran lived in an apartment attached to the main house.
The National Enquirer had a reporter on the island all week researching a piece.
The judge in the case, Bob Kit, will decide by Sunday whether there is enough evidence to keep them in jail.
The law says authorities can hold detainees for up to 116 days without filing formal charges.
ST. KITTS: International nursing school opens amid shortage provoking crises from California to Ireland
The Cubans hope to improve the genetic composition of their herds and increase the number of cattle with the goal of becoming self-sufficient in milk production, said Tatiana Taboada Gonzalez of the Cuban import agency Alimport.
The letter was read Wednesday by Cuban Vice President Carlos Lage at the Group of 77 gathering of 132 countries.
The dilemma brought the 22-year-old New York native to a new international nursing school in the Caribbean country of St. Kitts and Nevis.
Both Croes and Court secretary Isella Wernet refused to reveal the rulings.
A three-block area of beach near the Aruba Marriott Resort was closed as police combed the sand and nearby dunes and drained a nearby swampy area while searching for 18-year-old Natalee Holloway.
Officials refused to reveal the rulings.
Government spokesman Rueben Trappenberg said Sunday there are no signs the worldwide publicity, much of it bad, has hurt tourism on Aruba where automobile tags bear the slogan "One Happy Island."
Food, agricultural products and medical supplies are the only items exempt from the 43-year-old U.S. trade embargo with the Caribbean nation of 11.3 million people.
On Tuesday afternoon, Aruba police blocked off several hundred yards of beachfront beside the Marriott Hotel while several dozen officers and U.S. FBI agents searched shrubbery-dotted dunes with two bloodhounds and a nearby swampy area was drained.
A nine-member jury rendered its verdict in the High Court on Wednesday night, after deliberating for two and a half hours in the case of Arjaan Hendricksen.
At a time when the administration is trying to mend fences with its European allies and heal wounds with the Muslim world over Iraq, the treatment of prisoners at the U.S. military prison in Cuba is commanding more and more world attention.
Abraham Jones, 28, was also released by police Monday.
Croes ex-wife, Jeanet Gei, said Friday she sees no way her ex-husband could be involved in a violent crime.
"This is not fair what the American press is saying," said Denny Scoop, a lifelong resident, sipping a beer Friday afternoon at J&J Snacks in Noord.
I will actually be able to save lives."
Seeing the camera crews, he broke into a sprint and a cameraman for CNN caught up to him as he frantically tried to unlock the door of his Mercedes and drive off.
Searches by authorities, volunteer islanders and tourists have led nowhere.
Searches by authorities, volunteer islanders and tourists have led nowhere.
"Those police should be searching or investigating the case instead," said the spokesman.
Island authorities said they are exerting every effort to crack the case, which is why the Oranjestad parade was cancelled Sunday.
Another radio host, Dick Miller, who, for 16 years has hosted an nightly music and talk program Canal 90 FM and, for a time, served as "Honorary goodwill ambassador to Aruba," said listeners have called saying they are distraught that Holloway is missing and distraught that it has happened in Aruba.
He said the American media should scrutinize its own country as thoroughly as it has examined Aruba.
Holloway Twitty sat on the front pew during a Mass dedicated to her family Saturday night at a Pentecostal church.
Holloway Twitty sat on the front pew during a Mass dedicated to her family Saturday night at a Pentecostal church.
Government spokesman Ruben Trapenberg said prosecutors asked that Carlo be removed because "they believe he broke a rule" in representing his client, according to Dutch law.
Resentment of the media's dogged pursuit of the Holloway investigation has angered some.
"We admire the strength and courage you've shown as a mother," pastor Gilbert Martes told the missing teen's mother, who listened to the sermon with her eyes closed.
BASSETERRE, St. Kitts (AP) _ People like Kate Zajdel are desperately needed amid a worldwide shortage of nurses.
CUBA: Cuban delegation eyes U.S. cows, hoping to improve herds' genetic composition
It could put Bush in an awkward position next month in Scotland at the annual meeting of the world's leading industrialized nations.
In the past two years, Cuba has imported US$1.4 billion (euro1.2 billion) in agricultural products from the United States, said Florida cattle dealer John Parke Wright IV, who is arranging the deal.
Cars full of ogling tourists choked L.G.
They staged a highly-publicized spectacle of a search of a beach where a local DJ claimed to have found a pair of women's underwear and condoms.
They sized up the animals for weight, age and the progress of their pregnancies and examined their heads, rumps and ribs.
International human rights groups have decried prisoner-treatment practices and policies at Guantanamo Bay, with Amnesty International calling the prison "the gulag of our time" and former President Jimmy Carter adding his voice to those seeking its closure.
Their next court appearance is Sunday.
At that moment, the Surinamese brothers told police, a black man dressed in a black security uniform and carrying a Walkie-Talkie went up to Natalee, seemingly to offer his assistance.
The Cuban delegation _ which also includes a cattle expert and a veterinarian _ is in Vermont this week inspecting animals that were lined up for them by the Brattleboro-based Holstein Association.
Camera crews sometime spend hours just waiting outside the courthouse to hoping to get a shot of a suspect leaving, and a what usually turns out to be a no-comment from lawyers and prosecutors.
Tourists Tyde Meadows and his new wife, Kelley, 23, from Hartselle, Ala., said the huge gathering of media attracted them to the site where they watched police pick through the shrubbery.
"I got put on a waiting list at four community colleges," Zajdel said.
Luke Noble, 15, a British national, and Dennis Campbell Harty, 19, a U.S. national, drowned.
None turned out to be true -- but that hasn't slowed pursuit of the story.
"I want my daughter and I want her now."
"We admire the strength and courage you've shown as a mother," pastor Gilbert Martes told Holloway, who listened to the sermon with her eyes closed.