Many immediately drew parallels between the murder of Van Gogh, was shot and stabbed to death Tuesday while cycling on an Amsterdam street, and the assassination of outspoken politician Pim Fortuyn on May 6, 2002.
Hirsi Ali, who has lived under police protection for two years, said she and Van Gogh had received death threats after the film was broadcast.
``There is a climate that sees people resorting to violence -- that is worrying,'' Prime Minister Jan Peter Balkenende said at a news conference in Amsterdam.
Police said that the suspect in the killing was a 26-year-old man with dual Dutch and Moroccan nationality.
Dutch Prime Minister Jan Peter Balkenende issued a written statement asking the public not to jump to conclusions.
The massive gathering in Amsterdam came after Dutch society reacted with shock and outrage to the killing of Van Gogh, shot and stabbed to death on Tuesday as he cycled in broad daylight on an Amsterdam street.
Theo van Gogh, a Dutch filmmaker and writer who had recently made a television film critical of Islam, was shot and stabbed to death on an Amsterdam street on Tuesday.
Theo van Gogh, who had received threats over a controversial film he made about Islam, was shot and stabbed to death Tuesday while cycling on an Amsterdam street.
Dutch filmmaker Theo van Gogh, who had received threats over a controversial film he made about Islam, was shot and stabbed to death Tuesday while cycling on an Amsterdam street, officials said.
Van Gogh, 47, a distant relative of the 19th century painter Vincent van Gogh, had received death threats after the broadcast of the short TV film, "Submission."
His alleged assailant, identified as having dual Dutch and Moroccan nationality, was arrested shortly after the attack.
The alleged assailant, a 26-year old Amsterdam resident identified as having dual Dutch and Moroccan nationality, was arrested after a shootout with police following the assassination in broad daylight early Tuesday.
Dutch Queen Beatrix and Prime Minister Jan Peter Balkenende voiced shock and concern at van Gogh's assassination soon after the killing.
A Dutch filmmaker who outraged members of the Muslim community with his works' attacks on the treatment of women in Islamic society was gunned down and stabbed to death on an Amsterdam street Tuesday morning.
Dutch chief prosecutor Leo de Wit said the suspect arrested at the scene was a 26-year-old Amsterdam man with dual Dutch and Moroccan nationality.
Shortly after the killing, the police arrested a 26-year-old man of dual Dutch and Moroccan nationality, whom they refused to name.
It is assumed that Van Gogh was killed because of his outspoken criticism of Islam after police said the alleged gunman was a 26-year-old man with dual Dutch and Moroccan nationality.
``We will show loud and clear that freedom of speech is important to us,'' declared Job Cohen, Amsterdam's mayor.
Both men had controversial views and took part in heated political debate.
"I abhor his views on Islam and find them hurtful for the Islamic community, but there is no motive that can justify a murder," added Ayhan Tonca of the Dutch organ for contact between Muslims and government.
The 47-year-old filmmaker, who was the great great nephew of the late 19th-century artist Vincent van Gogh, caused an uproar this summer among the Dutch Muslim community with his short film "Submission" about Islam and women.
Van Gogh, the great great nephew of 19th-century Dutch painter Vincent van Gogh, was a staunch critic of multicultural society as a whole.
Friends and associates said van Gogh had received anonymous death threats after Dutch television aired his controversial short film ``Submission'' in August.
Late Tuesday Dutch Interior Minister Johan Remkes said the suspect had ties with Islamic extremists in the Netherlands but did not belong to the hard core group of some 150 extremists being monitored by the intelligence services.
After a shootout in which one policeman and a bystander were slightly wounded, police wounded and captured the alleged assailant, whom they identified only as a 26-year man of dual Dutch and Moroccan nationality.
Prime Minister Jan Peter Balkenende described Van Gogh as "a man who got involved in public debate and expressed strong opinions."
Prime Minister Jan Peter Balkenende called for calm and asked people to let investigators do their job before jumping to conclusions.
"This is a sad day for the freedom of speech which is the cornerstone of democracy and the rule of law," Dutch Prime Minister Jan Peter Balkenende said.
As the nation reeled from another daylight killing following the assassination of outspoken politician Pim Fortuyn in 2002, Dutch Prime Minister Jan Peter Balkenende condemned the attack.
After it became known that van Gogh's alleged killer was of Moroccan descent, politicians and commentators feared ethnic tensions and called for calm.
Moroccan organisations in The Netherlands condemned the murder and called for calm.
Instead of holding a silent wake protesters on Amsterdam's central Dam Square made as much noise as possible, banging pots and pans and blowing horns and whistles.
He called Van Gogh "a champion of the freedom of speech" and lamented the polarization of Dutch society.
The friends and family of Van Gogh had asked for people to make as much noise as possible in support of the freedom of speech.
A Dutch filmmaker who received death threats after his recent movie criticized the way women were treated under Islam, was shot and stabbed to death in Amsterdam on Tuesday.
The murder of Van Gogh immediately brought back memories of the assassination of rightwing populist politician Pim Fortuyn on May 6, 2002 for many Dutch.
On Wednesday many papers compared the killing of van Gogh to the assassination of rightwing populist politician Pim Fortuyn on May 6, 2002.
Witnesses told the police that the assailant then stuck a note on his victim's chest with the knife.
"It is absolutely terrible and reminds everybody of what happened to Pim Fortuyn," Dutch Europe Minister Atzo Nicolai told EU foreign ministers in Brussels.
Dutch Justice Minister Piet Hein Donner said the suspect "acted out of radical Islamic fundamentalist convictions," and added that he had contacts with a group that was under surveillance by the Dutch secret service.
The actresses have Quranic verses dealing with women written on their bare skin, and some have traces of lashings painted on their bodies.
Donner did not confirm the report, which did not cite a source.
Donner said the suspect's fundamentalism was evident "from his past and environment."
As he emerged, he fired at the police.
He then ran into a nearby park, which was quickly cordoned off by police.
Van Gogh himself had said in an interview with Dutch public radio on Friday that he "could not imagine" that anyone would want to harm him.
Amsterdam mayor Job Cohen announced that a memorial gathering for Van Gogh would be held Tuesday at 8:00 pm in Amsterdam's central Dam square, with two minutes of silence to be observed in Van Gogh's memory.
The national news service NOS said the suspect was friends with an 18-year-old Muslim, Samir Azzous, who is awaiting trial on charges of planning a terrorist attack on targets including a nuclear reactor and Amsterdam's Schiphol Airport.
No further details were given and the police would say nothing about a possible motive.
They expressed fears of possible reprisals against Muslims.
"He often insisted on the need to preserve our freedom of speech.
"I believe they think 'that's the village idiot why would you shoot him?
Police did not release the suspect's identity, but said he had a record of violent crime.
He was sentenced to 18 years in prison for the murder.
He was being treated in hospital and would be questioned later, the authorities said.
Van Gogh, a prolific filmmaker, columnist and writer who dealt with a wide range of subjects but always mocked hypocrisy, also published a book titled "Allah Knows Better," a scathing critique of Islamic militants and clergy, whom he called woman haters.
The man suspected of killing van Gogh fired several shots at about 8:30 a.m., then crossed the street and stabbed van Gogh several times with a knife, a police spokesman said.
"Escalation is in nobody's best interest," the Moroccan Municipal Assemby in Amsterdam said.
The interior minister would not comment on the reports.
The film featured four women in see-through robes showing their breasts with texts from the Koran daubed on their bodies and talking about the abuse they had suffered.
Asked if she and van Gogh had discussed the death threats, she said: "He told me, 'Ayaan, if they kill me, remember the rule of law has to be protected against extremists."'
Dutch NOS public television reported that the suspect in Van Gogh's murder had ties with a man identified as Samir A., arrested on suspicion of planning a terrorist attack in the Netherlands.
"Theo did not want any police protection," she said of van Gogh in a telephone interview.
He said he would only report the threats to the police."
He also directed television series, wrote columns and books, and had just finished a movie about the assassination of Fortuyn.
Environmental activist Volkert van der Graaf shot Fortuyn as he came out of a radio studio.
The suspected gunman was shot in the leg by police while fleeing the scene.
The Dutch police authorities have arrested eight suspects concerning the killing of the famous film maker Theo van Gogh, Radio Netherlands reported Wednesday.
It features images of women with Koranic verses painted on their bodies under see-through chadors.
The 10-minute short tells the fictional stories of four women who endure incest, rape, beatings and forced marriages.
Balkenende described the filmmaker as a man of "outspoken opinions," and added that it would be deplorable for a difference of opinion to lead to murder.
The document is believed to be the suspect's will, a sign that he planned to die in the attack that was apparently driven by religious extremism, a law enforcement official said.
Police found that he left a document attached to a knife he used to stab the victim, authorities said.
The suspect's name was not released, but law enforcement officials said they knew the 26-year-old Dutch-Moroccan for his ties to accused Muslim extremists and his criminal record.
Police cornered the gunman in a nearby park and a gunfight ensued, during which the suspect was wounded in the leg and an officer suffered minor wound, authorities said.
The wounded van Gogh dropped his bike and stumbled away, but the gunman gave chase, shot him again and stabbed him, police said.
Another cyclist, described as bearded and wearing Islamic-style clothes, pulled up behind him and opened fire, police said.
Writer-director Theo van Gogh, a descendant of the artist Vincent van Gogh, was attacked shortly before 9 a.m. as he rode his bicycle through Amsterdam's tree-lined streets toward the offices of his production company.
A memorial called by the mayor of Amsterdam, Job Cohen, was held Tuesday night on Dam Square, in the center of the city.
"Life will be a lot more boring without him," said Eveline van Dijck, a producer who worked with him.
Van Gogh had many admirers and critics.
"Either he underestimated the danger or he did not want to be scared by it -- I rather think the latter," said Nelleke Noordervliet, a writer who knew van Gogh well.
On Tuesday, friends and associates of van Gogh debated on radio and television why he had not taken the death threats seriously.
By coincidence, van Gogh had just completed a lengthy film about the life and ideas of Fortuyn, which was to be released in December.
The crowd was estimated at more than 20,000 people.
The killing evoked the slaying of the populist right-wing politician Pim Fortuyn, who, like van Gogh, talked openly about taboo subjects, including Islam and immigration.
"Escalation is in no one's best interest," a spokesman for a Moroccan group said.
Members of immigrant groups in Amsterdam representing Moroccan and Turkish associations condemned the killing and pleaded for dialogue.
Immigrants often say it is hard to assimilate in a country where many people do not want them.
The center-right government has recently tightened immigration laws and pressed immigrants to try harder to integrate by taking language and citizenship classes.
Close to a million of the country's 16 million people are Muslim immigrants or their descendants.
In a recent survey, many Dutch said they fear the growing number of Muslims and the possibility that Islamic militants may be among them.
She said people were worried about possible repercussions and the political mood in the country.
He was known as a Muslim activist,'' said the official, who asked not to be identified.
``He had indirect contacts with people under investigation for Islamic extremism.''
Thousands gathered Tuesday night for a memorial rally called by Amsterdam's mayor, an event that was accompanied by loud drummers as the rowdy van Gogh would have wanted.
People think, `He's the village idiot, so why would I shoot him?'
Some Muslim activists called van Gogh's film blasphemous.
Van Gogh admired President Bush and his self-declared ''war on terrorism,`` according to Emerson Vermaat, a Dutch investigative journalist writing a book on al-Qaida in Europe.
Their 10-minute film presented the stories of four women who, while saying their prayers, describe to God the sexual and physical abuse they have suffered at the hands of the men in their lives.
Van Gogh's hard-edged rhetoric drew criticism; he shared Fortuyn's typically Dutch mix of social liberalism and political conservatism, commentators said.
The crime was the latest wake-up call for the Netherlands' low-crime but increasingly troubled society, which has struggled to integrate Muslim immigrants.
It's unacceptable if expressing a free opinion was the reason behind this brutal murder.``
In a brief ensuing gunfight, both the suspect and a policeman were wounded, the police spokesman said.
''Let's allow the investigators to do their jobs.
''The facts have to be carefully examined,`` he said.
Police had looked into the threats against van Gogh but decided they were not solid enough to assign him guards, a Dutch prosecutor told journalists Tuesday.
Then he added: ''The bullet won't come for me.
"Nothing is known about the motive," he said in written statement.
''If it happens, it happens,`` van Gogh said.
But van Gogh, a chain-smoker with a defiant, irascible style, dismissed the dangers during a radio interview last week.
Apparently in this country, the habit is to wait until someone dies before taking action.``
''It's incredibly stupid that the local authorities in Amsterdam didn't protect van Gogh,`` she added. ''
I've had security around me, so Theo was the easiest target.
I know how the Arabic culture of revenge works.
``He's been threatened almost constantly since the summer.
``Everyone knew that this could happen,'' Ali told the NRC Handelsblatt newspaper Tuesday.
Congressional deputy Ayaan Hirsi Ali has lived with around-the-clock bodyguards for several years because of threats arising from her campaign against abuse of women in Islamic immigrant communities.
A feminist politician who starred in van Gogh's film accused authorities of failing to prevent a crime foretold.
More than 10,000 people poured onto Amsterdam's central square in an emotional demonstration of support for Van Gogh and against violence.
"You cannot just kill people on the street in a brutal way when you disagree with them."
``He was attempting to show in his own way where religious views and liberal views clashed.''
Ikram, a 31-year-old mother, came to the rally with a sign saying 'Muslims against violence'.
On the other hand ... there are people who wonder if there will be a war against Moroccans," Abdou Menabi, chairman of the Urban Assembly of Moroccans in Amsterdam said, voicing the concerns of many.
"Everybody is shocked by the murder.
In the Moroccan community there is a growing fear that they will be singled out for revenge.
Out of a population of 16 million the Netherlands has some 900,000 Muslims and of those some 300,000 are of Moroccan descent.
Many Jewish organisation branded him an anti-Semite and he was generally known as a arch provocateur.
Later Wednesday an Internet condolence register set up for van Gogh was closed down because it was flooded with racist remarks.
By Wednesday night some 100 witnesses had been questioned by police.
Van Gogh's killer was said to have had contacts with the group and allegedly stayed at each of the five homes searched.
All eight people had already been arrested for suspected terrorist activities in October 2003 but were later released.
The arrests were made after police searched five apartments and seized computer equipment and fundamentalist writings.
They were six Moroccans, one Algerian and a man having dual Moroccan and Spanish citizenship.
Amsterdam police chief Bernard Welten said late Wednesday that a total of eight men aged between 19 and 27 had been arrested in connection with the murder.
The suspect is being held in isolation and cannot receive anybody except his lawyer.
The judicial authorities declined to give further information on the content of the papers, with the prosecutor declining to confirm a report that the one found on the suspect's body was a farewell letter.
Public prosecutor Leo de Wit told a news conference in Amsterdam that the motive was believed to have been his radical Islamic views, basing the assumption on the content of two papers, one stuck on the dagger used to attack the director, the other found on the suspected killer during a search.
"The murder could be the start of a spiral in which different communities come to view each other as enemies," the Christian Trouw daily warned Wednesday.
A day after the brutal killing of controversial Dutch film-maker Theo van Gogh by a suspect linked to Islamic extremists, many were left wondering what happened to the Netherlands' famed tolerance and fear a society deeply divided.
The government has pressed for Dutch language tests and citizenship classes and has announced plans to repatriate up to 26,000 immigrants -- some of them long-time residents -- whose applications for political asylum have been rejected.
There are nearly 1 million Muslims in the Netherlands, about 5.5 percent of the population, and recent opinion polls suggest that many Dutch citizens feel threatened by their presence.
Van Gogh also wrote a book entitled ``Allah Knows Better'' that criticized Islamic extremism and claimed Muslim clerics hated women.
Van Gogh made ``Submission'' in collaboration with Ayaan Hirsi Ali, a Dutch politician and former Somali refugee who said she had fled an arranged marriage and physical abuse in her native country.
At a short memorial gathering for Van Gogh in Amsterdam, attended by some 20,000 people, many Muslims showed up especially to demonstrate that they condemned the killing.
"I was debating whether or not to come, but I decided that as a Muslim and as a Moroccan I should take up my responsibility to show that we do not support this act," she told AFP.
``He was very outspoken, but he was not a racist,'' Hartog said.
"After Pim Fortuyn, another person has been killed who held strong views on controversial issues and did not hide them," the popular daily Algemeen Dagblad said.
Most Dutch radio and television stations have changed their schedules for Tuesday night to pay homage to Van Gogh.
"There are also Dutch people who do bad things," he said.
Dutch Foreign Minister Bernard Bot stressed that the murder "should not lead to animosity between certain groups in society".
The arrested include six Moroccans, an Algerian and a Moroccan with Spanish citizenship, the report said.
"It is an attack against the freedom of speech, the freedom of religion, the freedom that allows us all to live together in this country," several big Muslim organisations said in a joint statement.
Investigators were quoted as saying that the man who shot van Gogh stayed in the apartments of those arrested.
We have to do something," was one of the typical reactions that flooded the Dutch public radio that had interrupted its program on the US election to bring the news of Van Gogh's death.
The men are hailed as champions of the freedom of expression, who said what they believed in.
Despite his controversial views Dutch commentators were quick to condemn the murder as an attack against the freedom of speech.
The filmmaker and columnist not only attacked Muslims but also Jews and gays.
The suspect, a 26-year-old resident of Amsterdam with Moroccan background, is not responding to police interrogators.
The Justice Ministry has confirmed that he was motivated by radical Islamic ideas.
The letter he left on the filmmaker's body allegedly called for a religious holy war.
Several witnesses said the man was dressed in an Islamic robe with a long beard.
The organisation called on its supporters to come to the special memorial gathering for Van Gogh in Amsterdam Tuesday evening.
"We ask the inhabitants of Amsterdam to keep cool and cope calmly with this murder and to bid farewell in a dignified manner to Theo van Gogh," the Moroccan Municipal Assembly in Amsterdam said, calling the murder despicable.
He was killed Tuesday morning while on his way to work in Amsterdam.
Theo van Gogh, 47, who directed television series and wrote columns and books, courted controversy during his entire career.
Van Gogh's film production company announced Wednesday that he would be cremated next week Tuesday in a memorial service open to the public.
In Amsterdam several Moroccan organisations held a protest rally.
"A mass demonstration of Dutch Muslims could be the symbolic start of a necessary cleansing," it suggested.
An award-winning filmmaker, television producer and newspaper columnist, Van Gogh was a controversial figure.
"Theo had strong opinions, but in our democracy we had become used to fighting for our opinion with our voices or our pens."
Hartog, a convert to Islam, said van Gogh's film had deeply insulted many Muslims but that he had been invited to address a meeting of the Moroccan community in Amsterdam.
He made the movie with Ayaan Hirsi Ali, a Somali-born refugee who fled an arranged marriage and ended up in the Netherlands, where she is now a member of the Dutch Parliament.
Officially the authorities will not comment on the motives for the brutal killing.
The police declined to describe the contents of the message.
Tonight's meeting is for everyone who is outraged at this event.''
In his final column Van Gogh even likened Cohen, who is Jewish, to a collaborator with the Nazi regime at the time of the German occupation of the Netherlands in World War II.
"Theo van Gogh picked fights with many people, myself included, but that is a right in this country," he added to cheers from the crowd.
The Dutch news media reported that it contained passages from the Quran.
Some 20,000 people gathered in Amsterdam late Tuesday to pay homage to controversial Dutch filmmaker and columnist Theo van Gogh who was murdered in the street.
"He did not keep quiet about his convictions, even when they were controversial," Balkenende said in a national address.
Van Gogh and Hirsi Ali, who wrote the script, have both criticized the conservative Muslim clergy for perpetuating views that are anti-women and anti-homosexual.
The assailant then shot him several more times at close range before stabbing him and placing a note on his body.
In a recent radio interview, Van Gogh dismissed the threats as "not something I worry about."
Her body had Quranic verses written on it in one scene _ further angering some Muslims.
In parts of the movie, the actress' naked body is shown through a transparent gown.
In the fictional story, a veiled Muslim woman spoke about her violent marriage, being raped by a relative and later brutally punished for adultery.
Van Gogh said he had received threats after the airing of his movie "Submission," which he made with a right-wing Dutch politician who had renounced the Islamic faith of her birth.
About 20 people were detained at another gathering in The Hague after chanting nationalist and anti-Muslim slurs.
"We are all so sad and baffled that you can get killed for your opinion," Tilly Hermans, director of the Augustus Publishing, said in a telephone interview.
"This has to end, once and for all," said 20-year-old student Orinta van Lent at the demonstration.
His death had shocked the people of a country where violent political crime is extremely rare.
Muslims, in turn, say new anti-immigration and anti-terrorism laws unfairly discriminate against them.
"Van Gogh was provocative but you have to be allowed to provoke people, that is freedom of speech," said Koos, a 21-year old political science student at the gathering.
It was not immediately clear if he had any connections to militant groups, but the police said he was not known to any Dutch law enforcement agency and that he had not been under surveillance.
"We are at a crossroads: do we follow the spiral of alienation, polarisation, fear and hate ... or do we make a stand and say 'no more'," asked Dutch Immigration Minister Rita Verdonk, who spoke on behalf of th	   sb/wdb
He once mocked a prominent Dutch Jew, referred to Jesus as "the rotten fish" of Nazareth and called a radical Muslim politician "Allah's pimp."
``Everybody wants to make sure we all stick together, Muslims and non-Muslims.
``People are rather shocked and embarrassed,'' said Yassin Hartog, coordinator of the Islam and Citizenship Foundation, a group that promotes peaceful dialogue.
Among those who planned to attend were Muslim groups who condemned the killing as barbaric.
He said van Gogh would not have wanted a silent vigil.
Amsterdam residents held a memorial gathering Tuesday evening at Dam square in the city center.
His murder came at a time of increased tensions in the Netherlands, where many blame violent crime on the Muslim minority, mainly made up of immigrants.
``We cannot allow bullets to rule our society because then dialogue is impossible.''
``On a day like this we are reminded of the murder of Fortuyn,'' he added.
The killing shocked the Netherlands, already apprehensive over large-scale Muslim immigration, which has provoked an angry public debate.
Tuesday's killing set off a new round of soul-searching and dismay among many people in the Netherlands.
Van Gogh's film added to that debate after it was broadcast in September.
It was the second political killing to shake this socially tolerant European country in recent years.
The film featured four women who claimed to have been abused by their Muslim husbands and who wore see-through robes showing their breasts, with texts from the Koran scrawled on their bodies.
Some reports said the killer slit van Gogh's throat with a knife as the victim lay helpless on the pavement.
Witnesses said a gunman opened fire on Theo van Gogh, 47, as the filmmaker bicycled down Linnaeus Street in the eastern part of the city, then chased him on foot, shot him again and stabbed him.
We do not want silence, we want noise," the mayor said.
``We do not want silence,'' he said, ``we want noise.''
Do we want to live in such a country?
"We won't gather for a moment of silence, but to say loud and clear: freedom of expression is dear to us, and it must continue," the city's mayor Job Cohen said.
"We will show loud and clear that freedom of speech is important to us.
Both men had outspoken views on Islam and many other issues and were always trying passionately to stir public debate.
Both men had outspoken views on Islam and many other issues and were always trying passionately to stir public debate.
"The suspect was known to the intelligence services.
The alleged assailant, identified as having dual Dutch and Moroccan nationality, was arrested and two people were injured in a shootout with police after the attack in broad daylight early Tuesday, police said.
van Gogh was known for his outspoken criticism of Islam.
The film by Van Gogh, 47, the great-grandson of painter Vincent Van Gogh's brother, was aired in August on Dutch television, drawing the ire of some Muslims.
Van Gogh received many threats after the film was shown but always laughed them off.
Dutch politicians and commentators were united Tuesday in their condemnation of the murder, in broad daylight on an Amsterdam street, of controversial filmmaker Theo van Gogh and called for calm together with representatives of the Dutch Muslim community.
Many commentators in the Netherlands immediately drew parallels between the murder of Van Gogh and the assassination of Fortuyn on May 6, 2002.
"I abhor his views on Islam and find them hurtful for the Islamic community, but there is no motive that can justify a murder," he added.
Ayhan Tonca, chairman of the Dutch association for contact between Muslims and government, denounced the killing as "horrific".
Chief prosecutor Leo de Wit confirmed that the killer had left a note on Van Gogh's body, the contents of which were not disclosed.
Van Gogh was widely known for his criticism of Islam and recently caused uproar with a short film linking domestic abuse with the perceived subservient position of women in the Islamic faith.
Van Gogh, 47, was widely known for his outspoken criticism of Islam and recently caused uproar with a short film linking domestic abuse with the perceived subservient position of women in the Islamic faith.
Van Gogh was widely known for his criticism of Islam and recently caused uproar with a short film linking domestic abuse with the perceived subservient position of women in the Islamic faith.
He called van Gogh ``a champion of the freedom of speech,'' and warned against polarization and intolerance in Dutch society.
The crowd blew horns, whistles and banged pots and pans.
The suspect in the murder of film maker Theo van Gogh, known for his controversial views on Islam, had ties with a group of extremist Muslims monitored by the intelligence services, the Dutch government said here late Tuesday.
He moved on the periphery of a group of extremist Muslims but was not part of the hard core of the group," Dutch Interior Minister Johan Remkes told a press conference.
That is worrying," Balkenende told a press conference.
Many here fear the fact that Van Gogh's alleged killer is of Moroccan descent could lead to ethnic tensions in Dutch society.
Many here fear the fact that Van Gogh's alleged killer is of Moroccan descent could lead to ethnic tensions in Dutch society.
A suspected Muslim extremist on Tuesday ambushed and killed an outspoken Dutch filmmaker who had received death threats because of his recent movie denouncing the abuse of women in Islamic societies, authorities said.
The killing instantly recalled the assassination of anti-immigration politician Pim Fortuyn, who was killed in 2002 by an animal rights activist.
Pim Fortuyn, an outspoken politician critical of open immigration and Islam was gunned down in May 2002 by an environmental activist who labeled Fortuyn a ``danger'' to society.
"The freedom of speech is a foundation of our society and that foundation was tampered with today," Amsterdam mayor Job Cohen said, after the deafening noise had subsided.
Van Gogh was someone who took part in the public debate with outspoken opinions, a champion of free speech.
Van Gogh made many enemies within the Dutch Muslim community with his often-insulting descriptions of Islam.
His short film "Submission" about Islam and women caused uproar in the Muslim community this summer.
Van Gogh had been inundated with threats since the airing of the film, ``Submission,'' in August, said Ali, a Somali refugee.
Van Gogh made his film with a controversial liberal politician of Somalian descent, Ayaan Hirsi Ali, who is a vocal critic of women's treatment in Islamic culture and who was also under police protection after receiving death threats.
Ali, who has renounced Islam, has been under police protection since the film was aired because of threats against her life.
After the film was shown on Dutch television in August, Van Gogh received death threats and police stepped up measures to protect him, much against his will.
He left a note on the body of the victim, De Wit confirmed, while declining to reveal the contents.
``This suspect was at least known to the authorities.
The Dutch intelligence service had said earlier there was a group of some 150 Islamic extremists being monitored in the Netherlands.
"There is a climate that sees people resorting to violence.
The Forum institute working for a multicultural society in the Netherlands called on "Dutch nationals together with citizens of foreign descent to unite for the preservation of democracy and the rule of law".
Muslim organisations in the Netherlands also rushed to reject the killing in similar terms.
Dutch Muslim groups _ despite disagreeing with Van Gogh's views on Islam _ condemned the killing and called for reconciliation.
Police said Van Gogh was shot twice as he biked along an Amsterdam street.
For many Dutch, the slaying revived painful memories of the 2002 assassination of maverick political leader Pym Fortuyn, another explosive crime mixing Islam and Dutch politics.
One of his most recent productions dealt with violence against women in Islamic societies and prompted many death threats.
Fortuyn, who had gained a large following and wanted to become prime minister, was killed by an environmental activist in May 2002, just days before national elections.
Before fleeing, the man left a note on the body of the victim, said Eric Vermeulen, a spokesman for the Amsterdam police.
Police kept watch on Van Gogh's house immediately after the film's airing but dropped that precaution because there was no concrete evidence of a threat, public prosecutor Leo de Wit said.
Police arrested a man with dual Moroccan and Dutch citizenship in the killing of Theo van Gogh after a shootout which left the suspect with a gunshot wound to the leg and a police officer slightly injured.