A plume of steam and ash rose from the crater of Mount St. Helens on Friday, CNN reported.
The volcano alert of Mount St. Helens was raised to Level 3, which "indicates we feel an eruption is imminent, or is in progress," said U.S. Geological Survey geologist Tom Pierson from the observatory.
"The eruption was predominantly steam but containing a little bit of ash," he said adding that there were no lava or mud flows from the crater and that the alert level in the region had not been raised.
Government scientists raised the alert level for Mount St. Helens after its second steam eruption in two days was followed by a powerful tremor.
Volcano experts have been warning of a possible imminent eruption of Mount St. Helens for several days as seismic activity in the area grew.
Mount St. Helens, the volcano that blew its top with cataclysmic force in 1980, erupted for the first time in 18 years Friday, belching a huge column of white steam and ash after days of rumblings.
The eruption occurred at 12:03 p.m., when there was a small explosion, followed by the steam and ash cloud that rose from the southern edge of a 1,000-foot (305-meter)-tall lava dome in the volcano's crater.
"The history of this volcano suggests that this could be the opening salvo of more eruptions," he said adding that the small 1986 eruption was similar to the latest one.
Volcanic experts have been warning of a possible imminent eruption of Mount St Helens for several days as seismic activity in the area grew.
When the Vancouver couple got to within five miles (eight kilometers) of the Johnston Ridge Observatory on Friday, they pulled to the side of the road and saw what they had been coming for: an ashen-white cloud billowing from the volcano's crater.
The earthquakes recorded over the past week, subsiding briefly after the Friday explosion, were the most intense seismic activity on the mountain since before the massive May 1980 eruption, which killed 57 people and caused widespread destruction.
The government scientists had earlier said they expected to see more small to moderate explosions after a series of earthquakes culminated in a plume of steam and ash on Friday, rising 10,000 feet into the air but posing no threat to health or safety.
The expectation is that magma -- underground molten rock -- will reach the surface and spill out as lava and that there will be more eruptions like the small one that happened Friday, or larger.
Scientists monitoring Mount St. Helens, which erupted Friday for the first time in 18 years with a minor explosion, said on Saturday that they were expecting a more powerful eruption within a day or so.
A day after the volcano spewed a plume of steam and ash thousands of feet (meters) into the air, there was a very brief steam release Saturday _ a puff of white cloud, followed by a dust-raising landslide in the crater.
"This was small explosive eruption from the lava dome that lasted for 24 minutes and generated a plume that rose up to a height of just under 10,000 feet (3,000 meters)," said USGS volcano and hydrology expert John Major.
After a week of steadily increasing seismic rumbling, Mount St. Helens on Friday burped a tall column of steam and ash that officials said was probably not a precursor to a large sustained eruption from the most active volcano on the West Coast.
Friday's relatively small eruption, which generated a plume of ash and smoke 16,000 feet (4,800 meters) high, was the first since a 1986 dome-building event at the volcano.
He said USGS observers near the volcano reported that no molten rock flowed from the point in the mountain's lava dome where the steam vented.
Major compared Friday's ``small explosive eruption'' to the activity that came to be regarded as normal in the six years after the 1980 eruption.
The tremor -- accompanied by a cessation in the earthquakes -- suggested that the magma had broken through and was rising smoothlyleading scientists to suspect an eruption might be imminent.
After the eruption, small earthquakes that had been rumbling around the volcano for the last week stopped, suggesting that pressures that had been building up had been relieved for now.
Lots of people here remember well how racked with fear they were in the weeks and days leading up to the 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens, the volcano that rained utter havoc from 30 miles away on this tiny town.
A tremor shook Mount St. Helens for 25 minutes early Sunday, prompting scientists to warn of an imminent eruption two days after the volcano came back to life.
The latest seismic activity "probably just reflects the fact that more rock needs to be broken for magma to reach the surface," said geologist Dan Dzurisin at the U.S. Geological Survey's Cascades Volcanic Observatory in Vancouver, Washington, about 50 miles (80 kilometers) south.
For the past week, scientists have detected thousands of earthquakes of increasing strength _ as high as magnitude 3.3 _ suggesting another eruption was on the way.
Analyzing the patterns of shaking, scientists said fresh magma, molten rock, had risen from deep below to the base of the dome, but had not broken through to the surface.
Before 1980, Mount St. Helens had last erupted in 1857.
The steam cloud poured from the southern edge of a 300-meter tall (1,000-foot) lava dome in the volcano's crater that has risen in recent days.
The US Geological Survey (USGS) said the volcano, which killed 57 people during a major eruption in 1980, was shaken by a "tremor burst" for 25 minutes.
Interior Secretary Gale Norton, who flew over the mountain Saturday, said the seismic activity has weakened the 1,000-foot (300-meter) lava dome that began forming in the volcano's crater after the 1980 eruption.
Hundreds of excited tourists who had flocked to Mount St. Helens in recent days were forced to move to a lookout point several miles below, causing a deep traffic jam on the one winding road that leads from this small town in southwestern Washington up to the mountain.
The 50-minute tremor "is the kind of seismic signal that occurs not when rock is breaking, but when magma is actually moving up in the throat of the volcano," Miller said at a news conference Saturday evening.
Seismometers pinpoint the tiny earthquakes that have been shaking Mount St. Helens for the past week and a half.
Seismic experts scrutinised the volcano from aircraft and from the mountainside to determine whether further eruptions were expected from the volcano that has been extremely active for more than 4,000 years.
But on Saturday, the earthquakes intensified, and shortly after noon, the volcano emitted a brief burst of steam, which was followed by a continuous, low-frequency tremor that lasted 50 minutes, believed to be caused by the movement of magma, or molten rock, underground.
But scientists said they did not expect an eruption on the magnitude of the May 1980 explosion that killed 57 people and caused widespread destruction.
``This was a relatively small eruption,'' said John Major, a hydrologist with the U.S. Geological Survey.
Scientists said Saturday that they saw more signs of deformation at the south side of the lava dome, a half-mile wide, 925-foot high bulge at the center of the volcano's crater.
"This is exactly the eruption we predicted," the USGS's Stephanie Hanna said Friday when St. Helens erupted.
Norton said the chances of an eruption or lava flow have increased, and that the volcano most likely will see moderate ash eruptions.
The government raised the advisory for volcanic activity to Level 3, the equivalent of a "code red" and the highest stage in a system used to indicate the likelihood of a volcanic eruption that could endanger life or property.
Once scientists realized this weekend that an eruption could be imminent, spectators were ordered to leave an observatory five miles from the crater.
Pierson said the volcano has released more seismic energy since quake activity began Sept. 23 than it has at any point since its devastating May 18, 1980, eruption, which killed 57 people and coated much of the Northwest with ash.
On May 18, 1980, after weeks of quakes, slides and tremors, of belching smoke, steam and ash, Mount St. Helens, a major peak in the Cascade mountain chain, erupted.
They can see the story of the 1980 eruption.
"This is exactly the eruption we predicted," the USGS's
In 1980, once scientists knew that powerful earthquakes were stirring Mount St. Helens, few people were visiting the mountain.
"The greatest concern at this point is an ash plume and the spread of ash itself that might come from an explosion," Norton said.
"This event is pretty much what we expected and anticipated over the last several days, a relatively small explosion from the lava dome," Major said.
Before Friday, the mountain had been dormant for 18 years.
After 18 years on inactivity, St. Helens roared back to life Friday with a giant plume of steam and ash.
When the eruption ended, government monitoring instruments showed a sharp decrease in the seismic activity that in recent days had been registering as many as four small earthquakes per minute on the mountain, located in a sparsely populated area of southwest Washington.
The flow of water out of the crater increased slightly, Major said, but there was no danger of floods or mudslides.
Mount St. Helens erupted again in 1986, but with nowhere near the same intensity.
Then, as in the last week, a swarm of small quakes rumbled around the dome, a bulge 925 feet high and a half-mile wide at the center of the crater, but then the ground quieted without a new eruption.
The 1980 blast obliterated the top 1,300 feet (390 meters) of the volcano, devastated miles (kilometers) of forest and buried the North Fork of the Toutle River in debris and ash as much as 600 feet (180 meters) deep.
Here in Toutle (pronounced TOOT-el), a town of 700 that is the closest to the mountain, many residents said that while they were not panicking, they were concerned about an eruption causing a mudflow into the three nearby rivers, which were flooded and full of floating debris in 1980.
For one, scientists do not believe the eruption will be nearly as powerful.
Hundreds of visitors at the building closest to the volcano _ Johnston Ridge Observatory five miles (eight kilometers) away _ were asked to leave Saturday.
Major, a geologist at the observatory, said at a news conference on Friday afternoon.
Absent such a flow of molten rock, USGS scientists have said it is unlikely that recent increases in seismic activity on Mount St. Helens will result in a significant eruption that could endanger people or property outside the immediate vicinity.
That leaves scientists wondering whether magma is rising from the deep chamber or whether the magma driving the tremors and eruptions is left over from six years ago.
US volcano Mount St. Helens roared to life Friday, spewing a giant plume of steam and ash into the sky and raising fears of a new larger eruption.
Pam Morret and her husband, Lynn, missed the big eruption of Mount St. Helens in 1980.
What has been unusual about the current episode is that all of the earthquakes have been shallow, within half a mile or so of the surface.
The pulsations of steam and dust on Friday, described by Major as "a relatively small burp," sent a gray-white plume nearly 10,000 feet into the air.
"We had to come back here when this happened," she said.
The closest structure is the Johnston Ridge Observatory, about five miles from the crater.
But the burst of activity sent scientists scrambling to establish whether the volcano, which killed 57 people when it erupted dramatically 24 years ago, was holding another more powerful eruption in store.
Officials on Saturday evacuated an observatory five miles from the crater and warned that people with respiratory diseases could be affected if large amounts of ash became airborne.
The 1980 eruption reamed open the route to the surface, and for six years smaller eruptions piled lava into the massive dome that marks the main conduit for magma.
Or it could mean that the magma had broken through the rock blockage and was now pushing its way toward the surface.
They said the next eruption was imminent or in progress, and could threaten life and property in the remote area near the volcano.
Soon afterward came confirmation that Mount St. Helens had erupted for the first time since 1986.
The signal "was far stronger after today's steam eruption" than the tremor that followed Friday's blast, Steele said.
Air sampling had detected only tiny amounts of the volcanic gases that new magma produces, but scientists said the gases could be sealed inside the system or have been dissolved by water on the mountain.
No evacuations were ordered, and there was no sign of any lava pouring from the volcano.
"If you shake it a whole lot and pop it open, you're going to get a lot of frothing and it's going to be an explosive event.
The 2,100 residents of this town and others near the mountain, however, were not evacuated.
"We still feel the risk is confined to this area," Pierson said.
Scientists said they had initially expected any eruption to be fairly minor, but were now saying it could be more serious.
But USGS seismologist Bob Norris said magma could be moving underground and he would not be surprised to see more explosions in the next days or weeks.
Friday's eruption brought hundreds of curiosity seekers to the area who were evacuated on Saturday from a five-mile (8 kilometer) radius around the mountain, including the USGS Johnson Ridge Observatory.
``This is exactly the kind of event we have been talking about and anticipating,'' Major said.
Few people live near the mountain, the centerpiece of the Mount St. Helens National Volcanic Monument in the Gifford Pinchot National Forest about 100 miles (160 kilometers) south of Seattle.
"This is exactly the kind of event we've been predicting," said U.S. Geological Survey scientist Cynthia Gardner.
Still, the eruption was nowhere near what happened 24 years ago, when 57 people were killed and towns 250 miles (402 kilometers) away were coated with ash.
Whether the magma is new or old is important, because that could determine whether the eruptions will explosively shoot clouds of ash that spread over a large area or, less catastrophically, just push out lava.
Mount St. Helens is one of several large volcanoes in Washington, Oregon and California that are part of the tectonically active Ring of Fire around the Pacific Ocean.
The swarms of earthquakes, a few a minute, have been interpreted as the breaking of rocks by the buildup of pressure.
The last explosion from the dome took place in 1986.
Steam frequently rises from the crater, but the 8,364-foot (2,549-meter) peak had not erupted since 1986.
Radios were tuned to news reports, and a nearby pizza joint was doing a thriving business.
"It's a once-in-a-lifetime experience so I thought I'd come on down."
"Events like this were very common between 1981 and 1985, so this is not unusual or extraordinary by any means," Dr. Jon J.
Again, the seismic activity died down, then picked up.
The Columbia River, the main inland shipping channel from the Pacific Ocean, was clogged with volcanic sediment and eventually had to be dredged.
Information like the volcano's internal temperatures and pressures can only be guessed at.
Now, a spot at the Castle Lake Lookout parking lot is a rare commodity.
Instruments aboard a helicopter sniff out gases seeping out of the rocks below and identify hot spots.
Some tourists _ like the Morrets _ smiled in giddy, guilt-free wonder at the mountain's power.
Hundreds of people visited every day, watching seismic needles chart bouncing lines at the observatory and quietly urging the volcano to put on a show _ just not too big a show.
Associated Press writer David Ammons contributed to this report.
That dome is now partially covered by a glacier, which is growing because the edges of the mountain crater shades snow and ice from summertime sun.
"But I am still excited to be here.
"We are going to keep a very close eye on it," Major told journalists in Seattle, adding that the level of earthquake activity in the area would be a crucial indicator of what is to come.
Others were disappointed: They didn't head for the hills until they saw Friday's eruption on television, and by the time they made it up there, the cloud had cleared.
The eruption capped an exciting week at the mountain.
If we do not see anything over the coming days, then there is a good chance that that might be it," he said.
But also, residents now know the drill, the evacuation routes and the ways to protect themselves and their property from heavy ash fall.Residents are slightly nervous but mostly aggravated at all the local traffic, caused by the thousands of tourists, reporters and entrepreneurs headed through town over the last few days on their way to a lookout point on the mountain.
Thanks to the predictive abilities of the U.S. Geological Survey, the Morrets were not alone when they finally did make it to Johnston Ridge, a barren shoulder of land which looks into the crater from about five miles (eight kilometers) away.
But scientists expect the impending eruption to be much smaller than the 1980 blast.
Scientists cannot say whether the volcano will now calm down or whether more eruptions will occur.
And if the mountain glacier melted as a result of an eruption, it could create a "debris flow" cascading down the mountain, officials said.
Hundreds of tourists clogged the parking lot and visitor center, drawn by the rumblings from the nation's most cantankerous mountain, but reassured that any eruption would be far smaller than the one that killed 57 people more than two decades ago.
After the tremor ended, the earthquakes resumed.
"All this buildup was leading to that relatively small eruption."
No communities are near Mount St. Helens; the closest, Toutle, is 30 miles (48 kilometers) west.
"There is no indication magma has worked its way up to the surface," Major said.
An area of two-to-four hectares (five to 10 acres) on the lava cap rose and fractured during the eruption, releasing glacial water and the column of steam, Major said.
Then, as now, a swarm of earthquakes shook the area, and scientists believe that magma rose upward beneath the crater, although nothing broke through as an eruption.
Bobbie Stout, the cashier at North Fork Survivors, a novelty shop on Route 504 about 25 miles west of the mountain, said she had seen cars "rushing up the mountain" before they were evacuated Saturday afternoon, and that there was an excitement in the air.
USGS scientists will keep a close eye on their instruments, Major said, and if seismic activity levels off for several consecutive days they may be able to conclude that the threat of more eruptions has passed.
"Something could happen at any time, basically," Scott said at a news conference on Sunday afternoon.
C. Daniel Miller, a scientist at the U.S. Geological Survey, said he expected an eruption "larger than what we saw on Friday, probably by quite a bit."
The greatest danger was expected to be potentially large ash plumes, which could shoot tens of thousands of feet up.
The growing consensus among scientists is that new magma is probably entering the volcano's upper levels, possibly bringing with it volatile gases that could lead to eruptions, said Bill Steele at the University of Washington's seismic laboratory in Seattle.
About 20 minutes after Friday's eruption, the mountain calmed and the plume began to dissipate.
The USGS has raised its alert to the maximum third level.
Major said the working hypothesis was that the eruption on Friday was somehow related to the 1998 events.
A volcanic tremor signal that came next was what prompted the heightened alert level.
He noted there is no evidence that a major flow of gas-rich molten rock, which could trigger a sustained eruption, has ascended from its known location seven miles underground to the top of the mountain.
Scientists had believed the recent flurry of shallow earthquakes may reflect movement of magma that came up the volcano's pipe during a 1998 swarm of quakes, but Pierson said Saturday's activity suggested at least some new magma was involved, making a larger explosion more likely.
It still looks like something happened here and this is rekindling that whole wonder, that whole amazement at nature."
Sandy McComb, 56, of Portland, Oregon, 60 miles (100 km) south, helped in search and rescue operations after St. Helens' devastating eruption, and she came to see the volcano come back to life this weekend.
Few people live near the mountain, about 100 miles south of Seattle.
The earthquakes quit after the eruption, said University of Washington seismologist Tony Qamar.
The fact that they are here is testament to the vast forecasting gains of scientists, who are armed with new technology and skills honed from the 1980 eruption, which killed 57 people, obliterated 200 houses and spawned worldwide interest in the study of volcanoes.
But 24 years later, as scientists warn of a new, imminent eruption, the fear has not returned.
He said Saturday afternoon that an explosion probably would happen within the next 24 hours.
Officials, including Interior Secretary Gale A. Norton, who held a news conference Saturday afternoon in nearby Vancouver, Wash., said their houses were far enough away -- 30 miles to the west -- to be safe.
Explosions from the crater could occur without warning, possibly throwing rock onto the flanks of the volcano, the USGS said in a news release.
The eruption was so short-lived that the ash appeared to pose no threat to anyone.
That could mean the pressure had lessened, and the volcano was quieting down.
He said there was a small increase in melting ice and snow off the volcano but no reported mudflows, or lahars, which historically have been damaging consequences of volcanic eruptions in the Cascade Range.
The instrument's readings showed that the site of the eruption was not particularly hot, indicating that the eruption of steam and ash had originated from at least several hundred feet underground.
The steam cloud drifted southwest from the mountain peak in southern Washington state and aviation officials warned aircraft in the area to avoid the plume, Federal Aviation Authority officials told AFP.
The volcano holds a 600-foot (180-meter)-deep glacier.
"This is red alert," Norton said, adding, "Overall, we are very fortunate that no one lives directly in the area that would be most impacted."
Although geologists said the probability for another eruption is high, they predict it would not be anything like that of 1980.
Seismic activity resumed later in the afternoon, Major said, but at a quieter level.
"Exactly how it is related is still a matter of speculation," he said.
"That makes us think this is the end of the eruption," Qamar said.
"I lived through the first one," Stout said, adding that she was slightly concerned about the glacier melting but otherwise calm.
"All this suggests that a second eruption is imminent," said USGS spokeswoman Catherine Puckett.
Melting of the glacier could trigger debris flows down onto the barren pumice plain at the foot of the mountain, the USGS said, noting a "very low probability" that downstream communities would be affected.
At 3 a.m. Sunday, a second tremor occurred, this time lasting 25 minutes.
"There's really been a revolution," said Dr. William E. Scott of the U.S. Geological Survey's Cascades Volcano Observatory in Vancouver, Wash., which is monitoring the mountain and holding twice-daily news conferences.
But for all their high-tech gadgetry, scientists still do not have a direct way to answer the questions they most want to answer: Where is the molten rock beneath the volcano?
After the 1980 eruption, a lahar traveled 50 miles from Mount St. Helens, ripping out bridges and destroying homes.
Scientists on Saturday saw an increase of fumaroles, a hole from which hot gases and vapors emanate, in St. Helens' lava dome and detected carbon dioxide, the USGS said.
The 1980 eruption blew off the upper third of the mountain, leaving a gaping crater 2,050-foot (400-meter) deep, 1.7-mile (2.7-km) long and 1.3-mile (2-km) wide.
But if you pour it in a glass and let the gas come out and then you try to shake the glass, you can't get as much fizz."
"The analogy is the old Coke can that you shake up and open," Scott said.
"All I can say is you better learn to respect it," Karen Meyers, 43, who lives in Toutle and witnessed the 1980 eruption.
I'm still hoping I'll see something."
They sure were not going to miss this one.
"It's exciting, but we're not really frightened or anxious."
Teas later moved to Oregon, but on Sunday she was back, having spent the previous night at a campsite on the mountain, eager to see an eruption.
Castle Rock residents, many of whom witnessed the 1980 explosion, which dumped truckloads of ash on this town, seemed to be taking the new development in stride and expressed little worry on Saturday, saying nothing could compare to the 1980 event.
"We can't take measurements in the interior," said Dr. Anthony Qamar, a professor of geophysics at the University of Washington.
"I know it might sound like the strangest thing in the world," said Laura Dodd, the owner of Lady Bug Antiques in downtown Castle Rock, who observed scores of tourists passing through town Saturday on their way to or from the mountain.
"We don't know where it is," said William Steele, a seismologist at the University of Washington.
And far from running away, people like Denise Horton, who lives 130 miles away in Sandy, Ore., are traveling hours to get here, bursting with anticipation for the eruption.
Speaking at a news conference, Major said the eruption appeared to have punched a hole about 100 feet in diameter in the glacial ice that covers part of the mountain's horseshoe-shaped dome.
They went quickly to their cars and drove away, with some relocating several miles (kilometers) north to Coldwater Ridge Visitors Center, which officials said was safe.
The ash could be accompanied by lava flow and possibly blow much farther northwest, depending on the weather, and cause health problems for anyone with asthma or other respiratory diseases, said Dr. Thomas Pierson, a geologist with the geological survey.
"It could happen right now while we are talking, in the next few hours or tomorrow."
The plume from Friday's 24-minute noontime eruption rose 10,000 feet before drifting away in light winds on a spectacularly clear autumn day.
It indicated a deep magma chamber about four miles underground and a shallower one perhaps a mile below the crater.
The Federal Aviation Administration on Friday warned aircraft to avoid the area around the volcano.
That suddenly created a more serious situation at Mount St. Helens, the most active volcano in the lower 48 states.
The blast sent clouds of volcanic ash high into the atmosphere, where jet streams carried it as far as the US eastern seaboard 3,000 miles (4,800 km) away.
The explosions shaved off 400 meters (1,300 feet) of the mountain's top, reducing it from 2,950 meters (9,680 feet) to 2,549 meters (8,363 feet).
In those years after Mount St. Helens literally blew its head off, more than a dozen lava eruptions built a rock dome inside the mountain's crater.
"Here I am at 52 and I'm back here again," she said.
"But the locals are not taking it very seriously.
Or, he said, "It may stall out and we may never see it."
From the pattern of seismic shakings before and after the 1980 eruption, seismologists laboriously constructed a fuzzy picture of the volcano's workings, the equivalent of a prenatal sonogram.
But another USGS expert Jeff Wynn warned that while the volcanic activity had ceased for the moment, it could come roaring back at any time.
Volcanologists must sift through competing plausible explanations for what they observe and what they do not.
"This one didn't involve anybody dying or any of that bad destruction, so we could feel good about enjoying it," Lynn Morret said.
"It's like waiting for a parade that's late," said Horton, who opened a hot dog stand on the mountain, selling mostly to reporters who were among the dozens camped out at the lookout point.
US Geological Survey scientists said the eruption at 11:57am (1857 GMT) marked a "small explosion" following a week of intensifying earthquakes in the area.
"The larger earthquakes have dropped off," Qamar said.
In comparison, Friday's eruption was a ``hiccup,'' USGS geologist Tom Pierson told reporters.
"The monitoring will definitely continue on a very intense scale until we can determine that the thing has really gone back to sleep," said Tom Pierson, a USGS geologist.
The belch on Friday might have instead been the denouement of some underground indigestion from six years ago.
Just before noon on Friday, seismometers at the Cascades Volcano Observatory in Vancouver, Wash., wiggled in a familiar pattern.
Gas-rich magma is more likely to erupt explosively.
A tremor _ a steady vibration _ "indicates movement of gases or fluid within the volcano," Steele said, while individual earthquakes indicate "a pounding and breaking of rock."
The volcano is being closely monitored in part because of its cataclysmic explosion in 1980.
No injuries or damage to property were reported.
After the mountain's cataclysmic explosion in 1980, the volcano erupted more modestly an additional 21 times, each usually accompanied by a characteristic seismic signal.
Mike Fergus, a spokesman with the Federal Aviation Administration in Seattle, said the plume had reached 16,000 feet in altitude, but did not know whether any planes would need to be rerouted.
After letting off steam from its lava cap in a spectacular natural display, the rumblings stopped and the huge cloud quickly dispersed.
"That's alluring to a lot of folks.
Mother Nature is going to win and you'll pay hell trying to predict it."
"To have the opportunity to witness this is something I can't pass up."
"We're not interpreting much about that decrease," Scott said.
"I mean, last time, their worst-case scenario didn't even come close to what happened here.
"If the seismicity in the area does not ease off, it's a sign that it's not over yet.
But lookout points farther away were not considered to be in danger.
The explosion killed 57 people, triggered the largest landslide in recorded history and blew 520 million tons of ash eastward across the United States.
"This is a concern for aircraft travel."
The flash snow melt on the mountain triggered floods and mudslides, sending streams and rivers over their banks and destroying infrastructure for hundreds of miles around.
"We were picking it up throughout western Washington and into central Oregon.
Towns and cities throughout the Pacific Northwest were buried in gray ash.
"That's the sort of thing that frankly sends a chill up the back of a volcanologist," he said.
But unlike hurricanes, which allow meteorologists to make detailed observations by airplanes and satellites, a volcano eruption develops mostly out of sight, hundreds to thousands of feet underground.
Through the day on Sunday, the intensity of the earthquakes diminished somewhat.
Yesterday we had a very weak tremor signal."
Scientists said they saw no signs that would lead them to worry that a larger, dangerous eruption was imminent.
Thus, when a new event occurs, like the continuous, 50-minute, low-frequency tremor on Saturday, the scientists sometimes need to quickly revise their thoughts.
Until then, scientists had not detected significant amounts of volcanic gases.
Saturday's tremor lasted about an hour before it was drowned out by a series of earthquakes _ one or two a minute, with a maximum magnitude of "well over 2," said Tom Yelin, a USGS seismologist at the UW lab in Seattle.
The crew aboard a helicopter taking measurements on Saturday reported the smell of rotten eggs, probably hydrogen sulfide emanating from magma.
Folks set up lawn chairs and cameras on tripods.
"I missed it the first time back in the '80s eruption and I certainly wasn't going to this time," said welder Dean Strahm, 48, of Gold Bar, who brought camping gear and a cooler and planned to stay all night.
"It's just a dynamic area," said Scott Hinderman, a ranger.
I am so disappointed," said Elva Ahearn, 68, of Auburn.
Near the town, an impromptu tailgate party was under way along the shore of Silver Lake, which offers a straight-on view of the mountain from a safe distance.
Dozens of cars lined both sides of State Route 504, their festive occupants spilled out along the roadside.
Mount St. Helens National Volcanic Monument: http://www.fs.fed.us/gpnf/mshnvm/
The volcanoes can lie dormant for centuries, then revive, sometimes catastrophically.
Still, scientists said the evacuation of the observatory was primarily a precaution in case of heavy ash discharge, which could make it difficult to drive.
Molten lava flows devastated forests and mountain meadows, creating a vast wasteland of mud, magma and ash.
"It was like a big burp," said Pam Morret, 49.
That would disappoint Kathy Teas, who was living nearby in 1980 and was evacuated from her home.
So they donned their leather jackets, chaps and bandanas, hopped on their motorcycles, and began cruising up Highway 504 _ past a theater that that airs the 1980 footage every 45 minutes, past trinket shops hawking statues made of volcano bits, past a lodge that happily warned travelers: "Watch your ash up there!"
Instruments on or hovering above the surface offer only indirect suggestions of what is happening.
Global positioning system sensors detect outward bulges as slight as a fraction of an inch.
Eathquakes are rumbling at a rate of one or two per minute, it added.
At the time of the eruption, scientists aboard a helicopter were taking measurements using a thermal imager, a device that measures heat from a distance.