The United States, he said, welcomed statements made this week by British Prime Minister Tony Blair and Irish Prime Minister Bertie Ahern that the key to moving forward was for the Irish Republican Army (IRA), Northern Ireland's main Catholic paramilitary group, to end all violence unequivocally.
The Irish and British governments hope for an answer before the August holiday period from the IRA, which declared a ceasefire in its campaign to end British rule in Northern Ireland ahead of a 1998 Good Friday peace deal which largely ended 30 years of violence.
London and Dublin are awaiting for an Irish Republican Army response to a call from Gerry Adams, leader of the group's Sinn Fein political wing, for an end to violence.
The London summit was taking place as all sides in Northern Ireland wait to see if the Protestant marching season passes peacefully and if the Irish Republican Army (IRA) will respond positively to an appeal from Gerry Adams, leader of its Sinn Fein political wing, to disarm and fully embrace democracy.
In April, Since Sinn Fein leader Gerry Adams made a direct appeal to IRA "volunteers" to give up all violence and adopt democratic methods, since then the Catholic paramilitary group has been holding meetings to discuss a response.
Protestant factions in Northern Ireland are adamant that there can be no political progress toward a lasting peace settlement without a move by the IRA to end all paramilitary and criminal activity and a decommissioning of its weapons arsenals.
They said the Irish Republican Army was standing in the way of revived Catholic-Protestant cooperation in Northern Ireland.
The IRA declared a ceasefire in its campaign to end British rule in Northern Ireland before the 1998 peace deal, which largely ended 30 years of sectarian violence in the province.
Protestant factions in Northern Ireland are adamant that there can be no political progress toward a lasting peace settlement without a move by the IRA to end all paramilitary and criminal activity and a decommissioning of weapons arsenals.
Britain expects an "imminent" statement from the IRA as to whether the Northern Irish paramilitary group is to agree to an appeal from its political wing to abandon violence, a government minister said Monday.
In April, Adams appealed to the Irish Republican Army (IRA) to end violence and fully embrace democratic means.
Northern Ireland's 7-year-old peace accord will eventually work but requires the Irish Republican Army to deliver a "clear and decisive" end to all its activities, Irish Prime Minister Bertie Ahern said Friday.
The pair would meet at the House of Commons on Wednesday, officials in Dublin said, with Ahern also holding talks with Ian Paisley, leader of Northern Ireland's biggest Protestant political group, the Democratic Unionist Party (DUP).
The Irish and British governments hope for a response before the August holiday period from the IRA, which declared a ceasefire in its campaign to end British rule in Northern Ireland before a 1998 peace deal which largely ended 30 years of violence.
"It is only on that basis that we can move forward," Ahern said.
Northern Ireland's Good Friday peace accord of 1998 proposed the creation of a joint Catholic-Protestant administration involving Sinn Fein, the IRA-linked party that represents most of the province's Catholics.
"To move forward, we need a clear, unambiguous end of all paramilitary and criminal activity and we need to see the completion of (weapons) decommissioning," Ahern said.
Northern Ireland has seen a virtual end to more than 30 years of violence since the landmark 1998 Good Friday peace deal, but Dublin and London, as well as an independent monitoring body, have accused paramilitary groups of continued criminal activities.
Northern Ireland has seen a virtual end to more than 30 years of violence since the landmark 1998 Good Friday peace deal, but Dublin and London, as well as an independent monitoring body, have accused paramilitary groups of continued criminal activities.
The IRA was supposed to have scrapped all of its stockpiled weapons by mid-2000 in support of the Good Friday deal.
In April, Adams called on the IRA to "fully embrace and accept" democratic means and end all paramilitary activities.
Three senior Sinn Fein leaders, including party president Gerry Adams, have stepped down from their posts on the ruling body of the party's Irish Republican Army military wing according to the Irish Independent newspaper on Saturday.
Irish Prime Minister Bertie Ahern admitted on Tuesday that he had held a series of private one-on-one meetings on the Northern Ireland peace process with Sinn Fein leader Gerry Adams, but denied they had been secret in any way.
"I think it is going to be very difficult to persuade unionism of the sincerity of any republican move, which is why that move has got to be clear and bold," he said.
The 1998 Good Friday peace deal largely ended three decades of intercommunity violence in Northern Ireland and established a power-sharing executive and assembly.
Protestant factions in Northern Ireland are adamant that there can be no political progress toward a lasting peace settlement without a move by the IRA to end all criminal and paramilitary activity.
The 1998 Good Friday peace deal paved the way for a Protestant-Catholic power-sharing assembly, but that was suspended more than two years ago amid allegations of IRA espionage.
The 1998 peace deal paved the way for a Protestant-Catholic power-sharing assembly, but that was suspended more than two years ago amid allegations of IRA espionage.
The comments from Northern Ireland Minister Peter Hain -- who said the IRA statement could "open a new chapter" for the British-ruled region -- came as it was announced that Prime Minister Tony Blair and Irish counterpart Bertie Ahern would meet in London this week.
But he said the pact's key goal _ a joint Catholic-Protestant administration _ would be revived only "in the context of a complete end to IRA paramilitarism and criminality and the putting beyond use of their weapons."
A deal on the so-called "decommissioning" of IRA weapons was almost reached at the end of last year, but foundered on demands from the DUP that the process by verified through photographs.
A deal on the so-called "decommissioning" of IRA weapons was almost reached at the end of last year, but foundered on demands from the DUP that the process by verified through photographs.
Answering questions in parliament, Ahern told MPs that the meetings with Adams, whose party is the political wing of the IRA, Northern Ireland's main Catholic paramilitary group, had merely been to maintain dialogue.
He said it would also put "enormous pressure" on Northern Ireland's largest party, the hardline Democratic Unionist Party led by Ian Paisley, "to come on board the peace process" for the first time.
The major Protestant party, the Democratic Unionists, refuses to cooperate with Sinn Fein, the IRA-linked party that represents most Catholics, citing the IRA's continued underground activities.
"I appeal to anybody who has any information about the disappeared to contact their families directly or indirectly so that other bodies may be cut down from the crosses and given Christian burials," Dooley told several hundred mourners at O'Connor's funeral Mass in St. Patrick's Cathedral in Newry.
"The changes in personnel are also seen as part of the "sanitisation" process within Sinn Fein as the party prepares to present itself as a democratic body that is ready to play a full part in political developments north and south of the border," the Independent says.
British Prime Minister Tony Blair and Irish counterpart Bertie Ahern were to chair the first major review of the Northern Ireland situation since the British general election in May at a meeting in London later Monday.
"It is also a demonstration of the commitment of the two governments to pursue progress across the range of issues embraced by the Good Friday agreement."
"It is clear that a positive response from the IRA would have an immediate and enormous impact on the political situation."
"We now need the IRA to deliver a clear and decisive response to Gerry Adams' recent appeal," Ahern said.
In an unprecedented charge in January, Irish Justice Minister Michael McDowell claimed the three Sinn Fein men were leaders of both the political and military wings of the republican movement.
Northern Ireland's peace process would receive a major boost if the Irish Republican Army responds positively to appeals to embrace political methods, a leading figure in the paramilitary group's political wing said Friday.
Hopes are rising in Northern Ireland that the IRA will, by the end of this month, announce a plan for a complete and swift process of disarmament.
Hopes are rising in Northern Ireland that the IRA will, by the end of June, announce a plan for a complete and swift process of disarmament.
Ahern was also meeting with British Prime Minister Tony Blair, who has worked closely with Ahern since 1997 to broker compromise in Northern Ireland, which is a part of the United Kingdom.
Paisley's Democratic Unionist Party, which represents most of the territory's British Protestant majority, says it won't cooperate with Sinn Fein unless the IRA backs up words with meaningful public action _ particularly the publication of photos of its disarmament.
Northern Ireland Secretary Peter Hain said the government was soon expecting the IRA to issue a new peace declaration that would address a long-standing demand for the outlawed group to disarm fully and disband.
He will also be holding talks with Ian Paisley, leader of Northern Ireland's biggest Protestant political group, the Democratic Unionist Party (DUP).
At the time of his disappearance, O'Connor had been driving towards a police station to report for bail in the neighboring Republic of Ireland, where he was facing trial for membership in a splinter group called the Real IRA.
Both emphasized that the IRA must demonstrate its voluntary demise in concrete ways.
In a direct plea to those who killed more than a dozen IRA victims, mostly in the 1970s and early 1980s, he asked, "How can you go home to your families every night knowing the hell these families are enduring?"
"On balance, these meetings at this particular time were better conducted outside the glare of publicity," Ahern said.
Blair and Ahern underlined their desire for the quick return of a self-governing Northern Ireland and urged the IRA to cooperate.
Despite this, IRA members continue to administer crippling beatings _ and occasionally fatal shootings and stabbings _ to their criminal opponents in Catholic areas.
"Everybody has their tongue out waiting for a statement from the IRA.
The IRA killed about 1,800 people from 1970 to 1997, when it called an open-ended truce.
Instead it began a secrecy-shrouded process in October 2001 and halted it in October 2003 still in possession of much of its arsenal.
Police and O'Connor's family say IRA members killed him, probably because he had been arguing with an IRA member over a money-raising racket the IRA was running in South Armagh, a major power base for the outlawed group.
The Independent says that in the wake of the London bombings, and with an increasingly hostile climate towards terrorist violence, the Provisional movement is understood to have decided that this is the right time to move into a new mode.
"There is no alternative to sharing power with Irish republicans; there is no alterative to the all-Ireland architecture and the equality agenda of the Good Friday Agreement," McGuinness said.
"For that trust to be restored there must be a clear, definitive and permanent end to paramilitary activity and its associated criminality," Hain said in a speech to the annual conference of the Irish Congress of Trade Unions.
In an unusual show of agreement, Irish Prime Minister Bertie Ahern and the Rev.
The newspaper said Adams, chief negotiator Martin McGuinness and convicted gun-runner Martin Ferris who is an lawmaker in the Irish Republic's parliament have all resigned from the seven-man army council of the Catholic IRA paramilitary group.
Ian Paisley, the top Protestant politician in Northern Ireland, called Wednesday for the outlawed IRA to disarm and disband.
McGuinness claimed a positive response would deal with the "genuine concerns" of Protestant unionists, who want Northern Ireland to remain part of Britain, and remove any excuse for unionist party leaders refusing to negotiate directly with Sinn Fein.
Sean Dooley made his plea at the funeral of Gareth O'Connor, 24, an IRA dissident who disappeared in May 2003.
The group has rejected responsibility for several other long-missing people abducted from IRA power bases in the 1970s.
If it is done and it is done genuinely and violence is genuinely given up, then the obligation then transfers to unionists to make sure that they drop their opposition to going into a power-sharing executive."
"A commitment in words needs to be capable of being verified over a period of time so that everyone can see that the commitment is real and lasting," he said.
BIIGC meetings are normally only attended by the Irish foreign minister and the British secretary of state for Northern Ireland but there is provision to scale them up to "summit level" involving both prime ministers.
Earlier this year, Adams has made a direct appeal to IRA "volunteers" to embrace purely political and democratic activity.
Ahern is to meet his British counterpart Tony Blair in London on Wednesday.
"I fully support Gerry Adams' appeal and I sincerely hope that the IRA does respond to it positively," McGuinness said.
"The United States continues to support fully the British and Irish governments' efforts to implement the Good Friday Accords," State Department spokesman Sean McCormack said.
He said until the IRA did this, Protestant leaders would refuse to share power with Sinn Fein, the IRA-linked party that represents most Catholics.
But he stressed, "It is not just words, it is deeds.
Ahern said he explained to Adams the clear position required by the Irish government before negotiations could resume on restoring the power-sharing political institutions in British-ruled Northern Ireland.
The newspaper says none of the new appointees is a member of Sinn Fein but all are regarded within the Provisional republican movement as militarists with proven records.
"The ground-breaking decision means that all links between the leadership of the political and military wings of the Provisional movement have been severed.
The agreement paved the way for a Protestant-Catholic power-sharing assembly that was suspended more than two years ago amid a crisis of confidence and allegations of IRA espionage.
US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice met Wednesday with British Secretary of State for Northern Ireland Peter Hain and reaffirmed support for the implementation of the Good Friday accords.
Any public pledge by the Irish Republican Army to cease all activities, including crime, should be weighed over time to test whether it's genuine, the British governor of Northern Ireland said Tuesday.
British and Irish efforts to revive power-sharing and secure a permanent settlement collapsed before Christmas after Sinn Fein rejected Protestant demands for photographic proof of IRA weapons destruction.
British and Irish efforts to revive power-sharing and secure a permanent settlement collapsed before Christmas after Sinn Fein rejected Protestant demands for photographic proof of weapons destruction.
British and Irish efforts to revive power-sharing and secure a permanent settlement collapsed before Christmas after Sinn Fein rejected Protestant demands for photographic proof of IRA weapons destruction.
If we get a statement on the issues I have mentioned, we would be very happy with the statement.
The talks, which will include senior ministers from both sides, were being held under the auspices of the British-Irish Intergovernmental Conference (BIIGC) which was set up under the 1998 Good Friday peace agreement.
Last month, Sinn Fein leader Gerry Adams, a reputed IRA commander, appealed to IRA members to leave behind their "armed struggle" in favor of democratic politics.
It says their posts have been filled by three men from Northern Ireland who are closely aligned to the Adams-McGuinness group pushing the movement onto a purely political path.
A Roman Catholic priest appealed Saturday to the Irish Republican Army to reveal the burial spots of more than a dozen people whose bodies have never been found.
The search for unmarked graves of IRA victims is one of many unfinished chapters of Northern Ireland's peace process.
But in a nod to Protestant leaders' unwillingness to form a power-sharing government immediately with Sinn Fein, Hain said an unspecified delay would be reasonable to determine whether the IRA was telling the truth.
Paisley emphasized Wednesday he would wait for at least six months following an IRA peace declaration to see whether the group followed through with deeds.
Power-sharing collapsed in 2002 following chronic arguments over IRA activities and weaponry.
"Words are not enough, but they are an important start, and I hope people would not underestimate the significance of a credible statement from the IRA," he said.
But we would, naturally enough, want to see that they happen."
The IRA's alleged misdeeds were highlighted by a massive bank raid in Belfast in December, blamed by police on the group, as well as the murder of Robert McCartney, a Belfast man beaten and stabbed to death in a bar in what his relatives say was an attack carried out by IRA activists.
... We are looking for action," Paisley said.
They warned that such a government would only be achieved provided that peace prevailed in the British-ruled province.
The discussions were to cover political developments in Northern Ireland, security and criminal justice matters, policing, the marching season involving the Protestant loyalist Orange Order, human rights and equality, cross-border matters in Ireland and Anglo-Irish questions.
Speaking to reporters earlier Monday, Blair repeated his call for republicans to unequivocally give up violence and commit themselves to wholly democratic methods.
"The holding of a meeting of the BIIGC at summit level is a demonstration of the close working and high level partnership between the two governments," the Irish government statement said.
These included a total end to IRA paramilitarism and related criminality and full decommissioning of the IRA's arms and explosives arsenals.
He said there had been "possibly three or four meetings" with Adams since March.
The IRA in 1999 described the locations of eight burial spots to a joint British-Irish commission coordinating the search, but remains of only three IRA victims have been found.
Ahern said he was hopeful that the IRA would issue a declaration within the next few months spelling out whether it will disarm and cease all threatening activities.
The IRA rejected those terms in December and since has been implicated in a string of criminal scandals, including a world-record bank robbery, the knife slaying of a Catholic man and a money-laundering network.
"It's immensely important that they do make this move...
"I hope that this response will be translated into clear reality on the ground."
"I am confident, now, with an imminent IRA statement expected, which I hope will be credible, that it will open a new chapter in Northern Irish politics," Hain told BBC Radio Ulster.
Ahern and Paisley _ a hard-liner who opposes Irish involvement in Northern Ireland and didn't begin meeting Ahern until last year _ spoke separately after a 90-minute meeting at the Irish embassy in London.
In a speech to British and Irish academics at University College Dublin, Ahern said the U.S.-brokered Good Friday pact of 1998 contained a complex set of goals that, if achieved, would ensure a stable, peaceful Northern Ireland.
Dooley said the O'Connor family's "worst has come to the worst," but the relatives of others slain by the IRA had not been allowed to lay their loved ones to rest.
Last weekend, police divers found his body still inside his car in a canal in Newry, 40 miles (65 kilometers) south of Belfast.
Ahern stressed to MPs that Northern Ireland was entering the summer season of Protestant loyalist Orange Order marches, that traditionally cause tensions between Catholics and Protestants.
However, in a joint statement the trio "categorically" denied they were members of the ruling body of the outlawed IRA and accused McDowell of abusing his office.
"It would give much needed new momentum to the peace process," Sinn Fein chief negotiator Martin McGuinness told a summer school in the Irish Republic.