The explosion at the Hilton hotel in the Red Sea resort of Taba on the border with Israel was caused by at car bomb, Israeli public TV reported, citing a police source.
An explosion ripped through the Hilton Hotel in the Egyptian resort town of Taba in the Sinai Desert on Thursday evening, close to the border with Israel.
Earlier, Israeli public television, citing a police source, said the explosion at the Hilton hotel in Taba was caused by a car bomb.
Two explosions in tourist camps in Egypt's Sinai desert which followed a massive blast at a hotel in the resort of Taba late Thursday were probably caused by car bombs, the region's governor said.
At least 35 people were killed and 125 injured in three explosions targeting tourists in Egypt's Sinai desert region late Thursday, an Egyptian police source said.
At least 30 people have been killed and 100 wounded in the three explosions along the Red Sea coast, an area popular with Israeli holidaymakers.
Shortly after the hotel blast, a second explosion was heard in the Sinai desert region of Nuaiba, between the Red Sea resorts of Taba and Sharm el-Sheikh, an Egyptian police source said.
Israeli Police said that at least 30 people had been killed in the blast, mostly Israeli tourists.
A suspected car bomb ripped through a hotel on the Red Sea coast of Egypt's Sinai desert late Thursday, one of three explosions targeting Israelis that left at least 30 people dead and scores more wounded.
An Egyptian police source said the three explosions killed at least 35 people and left another 125 wounded.
Israeli public television, citing a police source, said a car bomb detonated close to the entrance of the Hilton Hotel in the resort of Taba just across the border from Israel, destroying a large part of the building.
A blast ripped through the Hilton hotel in Egypt's Red Sea resort of Taba on Thursday evening, with medical sources saying at least 100 people had been killed or wounded.
Hospital officials said at least 29 people were killed, and witnesses gave unconfirmed reports that all three explosions were caused by car bombs.
Egyptian Tourism Minister Ahmed al-Maghrabi put the toll at more than 30 dead and 100 wounded from the three explosions in Taba and two other resorts on the south Sinai coast, an area popular with Israeli holidaymakers.
A suspected car bomb ripped through a hotel on the Red Sea coast of Egypt's Sinai desert late Thursday, one of three explosions targeting tourists that left at least 35 people dead and scores more wounded.
In the wake of three explosions that had killed at least 35 people in Egypt's Sinai Desert, Israeli Foreign Minister Silvan Shalom on Friday asked his Egyptian counterpart to help rescue Israeli wounded.
Israeli public television, citing a police source, said a powerful car bomb detonated close to the entrance of the Hilton hotel in the beach resort of Taba just across the border from Israel, destroying a 30 minutes ago that smashed all the windows.
Three explosions shook popular resorts on Egypt's Sinai Peninsula on Thursday night as many Israelis vacationed at the close of a Jewish holiday.
Suspected car bombs ripped through a hotel and two beachside tourist sites on the Red Sea coast of Egypt's Sinai desert late Thursday, killing at least 30 people, most of them Israelis.
At least 23 Israelis were killed in the blast, Egyptian police said.
"We know dozens of Israelis have been killed," an Israeli police source said after a massive explosion devastated the Hilton hotel in Taba, a tiny town just across the border from Israel.
The explosions occurred as Israelis were celebrating the end of the Jewish holiday of Sukkot, and followed warnings from the country's intelligence services that Israelis should keep out of the Sinai desert.
Egyptian Tourism Minister Ahmed al-Maghrabi put the toll at more than 30 dead and 100 wounded from the three explosions in Taba and two other resorts on the south Sinai coast.
The blast, the reasons for which were not immediately clear, killed or wounded at least 100 people of different nationalities, an Egyptian hospital source said.
South Sinai governor General Mustafa Afifi said two charred trucks were found at the two tourist camps of Shitani and Ras Soltan on the coast road of the desert peninsula south of Taba, suggesting that the blasts were also caused by car bombs.
Earlier reports said at least 23 Israelis were killed in the Hilton blast.
"We know dozens of Israelis have been killed," an Israeli police source said after a massive explosion devastated the vast Hilton hotel in Taba at the main border crossing point between Egypt and Israel.
Israeli radio reported that the blast was likely an attack, with an Israeli foreign ministry saying it could have been a car bomb attack, although the Egyptian public TV had earlier said the blast was due to a gas leak.
He said there was vague but solid intelligence about a possible attack against Israeli tourists in Egypt's Sinai, where as many as 12,000 Israelis were traveling for the holidays, according to the Israeli Foreign Ministry.
Shortly after the hotel blast, another two explosions rocked tourist camps at Shitani and Ras Soltan which lie on the coast road of the desert peninsula to the south of Taba.
The explosions occurred as Israelis were celebrating the end of the Jewish holiday of Sukkot, and followed intelligence warnings that Israelis should keep out of the Sinai because of possible attacks.
The explosions occurred as Israelis were celebrating the end of the Jewish holiday of Sukkot, and followed intelligence warnings that Israelis should keep out of the Sinai because of possible attacks.
He was unable to give their nationalities, but another police source told AFP earlier that at least 23 Israelis were among those killed and the Foreign Office in London said two of the wounded were Britons.
Suspected car bombs ripped through beach resorts packed with Israeli tourists on the Red Sea coast of Egypt's Sinai desert late Thursday, killing at least 30 people and causing carnage and chaos.
Five people were killed in the twin blasts, and Egyptian television said 43 people were wounded.
Three explosions shook three Egyptian Red Sea resorts popular with vacationing Israelis on Thursday night, killing at least 35 people and wounding about 100, according to officials from Egypt, Israel and nearby hospitals.
"At least seven people have been brought to the emergency room, one of them seriously wounded," Coby Arad of Yosseftal hospital in Eilat, across the border in Israel, told public radio.
The source said the car bomb detonated close to the entrance of the hotel, destroying a large part of the building.
In the largest explosion, early reports suggested that a truck bomb may have been driven into the Taba Hilton, a large concrete resort hotel in a little village just across the Israeli border and near the Israeli resort town of Eilat.
Israeli police said the explosion was caused by a powerful car bomb detonated near the entrance to the four-star Hilton, destroying a wing of the building.
Resorts dotted along the Sinai's desert coast have remained popular holiday spots for Israelis since the territory was handed back to Egypt as part of a 1979 peace deal, the first between Israel and an Arab countryis were continuing to flock to the Sinai despite the warnings.
A source at Taba Hospital said that 114 people had been wounded.
Egyptian security officials said there was no evidence of terrorism, but Israel's army radio said officials believed the Taba explosion was a car bomb, and witnesses at the other two sites told relatives that cars had exploded.
Israel returned the Sinai to Egypt in 1982 but claimed that Taba was inside Israel according to the international border.
South Sinai governor General Mustafa Afifi said two charred trucks were found at the Shitani and Ras Soltan camps on the coast road south of Taba, indicating that the blasts were also caused by car bombs.
Egyptian public television had said earlier that the Hilton blast was caused by a gas leak.
The Egyptian government at first suggested the Hilton explosion was caused by gas canisters and initially prevented Israeli rescue workers without passports from crossing the border to the hotel.
There were Israelis among them, they were bleeding in the sand and there was no one there to help them."
Egyptian police said two other explosions rocked nearby tourist camps further south in the Sinai peninsula.
At least seven people died at Ras al-Sultan, most of them Egyptian workers, according to the Egyptian media.
Israeli officials said they believed the blasts were caused by terrorist bombs.
"I heard a huge explosion," said Yigal Vakni, an Israeli at the Hilton who spoke to Israeli Army Radio.
Ties between security agency, told the cabinet on September 19 that prompt action had thwarted a plot by Palestinian militant group Hamas to strike Israeli tourists in the Sinai.
At least seven Egyptian employees of one camp were among the injured, they said.
The two other explosions took place to the southwest, in the resort villages of Ras al-Sultan and Nuweiba.
But Taba, which in ancient times was once a resting point for caravans en route to the Fort of Aqaba, was excluded from Israel's 1982 handover of the Sinai and was only returned in 1989 after years of wrangling following a ruling by the International Court of Justice.
But Taba, which in ancient times was once a resting point for caravans en route to the Fort of Aqaba, was excluded from Israel's 1982 handover of the Sinai and was only returned in 1989 after years of wranging following a ruling by the International Court of Justice.
Last month, Israeli intelligence warned Israelis to keep out of the Sinai desert, citing vague but solid information about possible attacks.
Avi Dichter, the head of Israel's Shin Beth domestic security agency, told the cabinet on September 19 that prompt action had thwarted a plot by Palestinian militants to strike Israeli tourists in the Sinai.
Avi Dichter, the head of Israel's Shin Beth domestic security agency, told the cabinet on September 19 that prompt action had thwarted a plot by Palestinian militants to strike Israeli tourists in the Sinai.
Guards fired shots into the air to try to disperse them, before finally shutting the terminal temporarily.
Roads were blocked, leaving vacationing Israelis at other hotels trapped.
"Because nothing has happened since previous warnings were issued, the public seems to be treating advisories from counter-terrorism experts and the foreign ministry as akin to the boy who cried wolf," the paper said.
Some debris from the vehicle used has been found by investigators, Israeli radio said.
Hamas, which has improving relations with Cairo, may not want to embarrass Egypt in this way, said Oded Granot, a commentator on Arab affairs.
The Egyptians say that Israel would best protect itself by making serious progress toward peace with the Palestinians, rather than by accelerating the cycle of violence.
"We were sitting in a restaurant and suddenly heard a very powerful blast," the man, identified only as Yaniv, said.
In a matter of seconds everything had collapsed, it was awful," said Liron, a 24-year-old Israeli woman.
South Sinai governor General Mustafa Afifi said that two vans were found ablaze in two tourist camps south of Taba, which led him to believe the explosions were caused by car bombs.
Ambulances were seen shuttling across the border checkpoint between Taba and the Israeli resort of Eilat, where hospital staff wheeled bloodied victims on stretchers.
Ambulances were shuttling across the border checkpoint between Taba and the Israeli resort of Eilat, where hospital staff wheeled in bloodied victims, including children, on stretchers.
Ambulances were shuttling across the border checkpoint between Taba and the Israeli resort of Eilat, where hospital staff wheeled in bloodied victims, including children, on stretchers.
Avi Dichter, the head of Israel's Shin Beth domestic security agency, told the cabinet on September 19 that prompt action had thwarted a plot by Palestinian militant group Hamas to strike Israeli tourists in the Sinai.
Part of the Hilton apparently crumbled immediately after the blast.
After the explosions, the anti-terror unit in the Prime Minister's Office called on all Israelis to leave Sinai immediately, and return to Israel, Israeli Army Radio reported.
Resorts dotted along the Sinai's desert coast have remained popular holiday spots for Israelis since the territory was handed back to Egypt as part of a 1979 peace deal, the first between Israel and an Arab country.
Resorts dotted along the Sinai's desert coast have remained popular holiday spots for Israelis since the territory was handed back to Egypt as part of a 1979 peace deal, the first between Israel and an Arab country.
Resorts dotted along the Sinai's desert coast have remained popular holiday spots for Israelis since the territory was handed back to Egypt as part of a 1979 peace deal, the first between Israel and an Arab country.
But Taba was excluded from Israel's 1982 handover of the Sinai and was only returned in 1989 after years of wranging following a ruling by the International Court of Justice.
Many Israelis have visited Egypt over the past month, during the period of Jewish holidays.
"Jamaa Al-Islamiya Al-Alamiya (World Islamist Group) claims responsibility for the explosion at the Taba hotel, carried out in revenge for the Palestinian and Arab martyrs dying in Palestine and Iraq," the caller said.
"Jamaa Al-Islamiya Al-Alamiya (World Islamist Group) claims responsibility for the explosion at the Taba hotel, carried out in revenge for the Palestinian and Arab martyrs dying in Palestine and Iraq," the caller said.
The caller said the attack was "in revenge for the Palestinian and Arab martyrs dying in Palestine and Iraq," the agency reported.
Hamas had threatened to strike Israeli targets abroad after the killing of a top militant in the Syrian capital of Damascus last month that was blamed on Israel.
Hamas had threatened to strike Israeli targets abroad after the killing of a top militant in the Syrian capital of Damascus last month that was blamed on Israel.
Hamas had threatened to strike Israeli targets abroad after the killing of a top militant in the Syrian capital of Damascus last month that was blamed on Israel.
"When we went out we saw the shops and the internal wall of the hotel had collapsed."
The explosions came amid a massive Israeli army offensive in the north of the Gaza Strip, a wedge of land near the border with Egypt, that has left 93 Palestinians dead in less than 10 days.
The explosions came amid a massive Israeli army offensive in the north of the Gaza Strip, a wedge of land near the border with Egypt, that has left 93 Palestinians dead in less than 10 days.
The explosions came amid a massive Israeli army offensive in the north of the Gaza Strip, a wedge of land near the border with Egypt, that has left 93 Palestinians dead in less than 10 days.
The Hilton was badly damaged by the blast and an ensuing fire, and 10 floors in part of the complex collapsed.
But he said the number of casualties was likely to rise.
But Israeli officials suggested that an attack of this magnitude would have been planned carefully from within Egypt and was not tied to the Gaza operation.
The warning about possible attacks came in an unusual public alert from Avi Dichter, the head of the Shin Bet intelligence service, not to go to Sinai resorts during the harvest festival season of Sukkot, when Israel shuts down.
Dichter said that the attack had been planned by the Palestinian Islamist movement Hamas to coincide with the Jewish new year holidays between September 15 and 18.
Dichter said the attack had been planned by the Palestinian Islamist movement Hamas to coincide with the Jewish new year holidays between September 15 and 18.
"At this time of year, most guests at the Taba hotel are Israelis, along with a small number of Egyptians and some tourists of other nationalities," Maghrabi told AFP.
We immediately drove over to the site and found wounded people on the ground.
"An explosion caused by gas took place at a Taba hotel," Al-Akhbar news channel said, without citing its sources.
Israelis on Thursday night wound up the Jewish holidays of Sukkot.
The Jerusalem Post reported on September 11, after the government travel advisory, that vacationing Israelis were continuing to flock to the Sinai, despite repeated and increasingly dire official warnings of attacks.
The Jerusalem Post reported on September 11, after the government travel advisory, that vacationing Israelis were continuing to flock to the Sinai, despite repeated warnings of attacks.
We then saw a second explosion not far from the first blast; it was a ball of fire higher on the mountain.
Two other blasts occurred about two hours later at nearby resort towns of Ras Satan, a camping area full of Israeli tourists, and Nueiba, witnesses said.
"From the first information that we have received it could have been a car bomb attack," a senior Israeli foreign ministry official told AFP, requesting anonymity.
"From the first information that we have received it could have been a car bomb attack," a senior Israeli foreign ministry official told AFP.
Hospital sources said the casualties were of different nationalities.
Quickly after the blasts, Shalom asked for Egyptian permission to allow Israelis to pass through the border without checks and to fly rescue workers into the Sinai.
Israeli investigators believe a powerful car bomb detonated near the entrance to the four-star Hilton, destroying much of the building.
He said Israel wants to send between 20 and 30 buses to the Sinai to bring home some 15,000 Israelis still staying there.
Israeli intelligence services have been warning Israeli holidaymakers to keep out of the Sinai desert, where Taba is located.
The Jerusalem Post estimated that over the past summer alone, around 300,000 Israelis took holidays in Sinai, replacing Turkey as Israelis' most popular tourist destination.
Since his warning, Israel has moved in force into the Gaza Strip that borders Egypt, trying to stop militant Palestinians like Hamas and Islamic Jihad from firing rockets into Israel.
Standing outside the hotel, he said, "we watched as the rooms disappeared, they collapsed one after the other."
An unidentified Israeli woman told Israeli television: "We immediately ran toward the beach, everyone running at once, and windows continue to shatter as we ran away.
There were reports of people buried in the rubble.
The Israeli prime minister, Ariel Sharon, spoke with the Egyptian president, Hosni Mubarak, and persuaded him to allow Israeli rescue workers to the scene without delay.
Israel will help evacuate any of the 12,000 to 15,000 Israelis who wish to leave Egypt's Sinai Peninsula in the wake of several deadly explosions, an Israeli foreign ministry spokeswoman said Friday.
"There is a plan to send buses to help them evacuate, those who want to," said the ministry's Rachel Shani.
There was no other immediate information about casualties.
International arbitrators disagreed, and Israel returned Taba, along with the expensive hotel, to Egypt in March 1989.
A previously unknown Islamist group claimed responsibility for the Hilton blast in a telephone call to AFP in Jerusalem.
A previously unknown Islamist group claimed responsibility for the Hilton blast in a telephone call to AFP in Jerusalem.
No definitive claims of responsibility were publicized, thought Agence France-Presse reported that someone claiming to be from a previously unknown group, Jamaa Al-Islamiya Al-Alamiya, or World Islamist Group, had taken responsibility for the Hilton blast in a telephone call to its bureau in Jerusalem.
Hamas has vowed retaliation against Israel and Israelis for the assassination of two of its leaders this year.
Television footage at the border showed an Arab Israeli woman being carried by her husband.
Entire families were wounded; they ran to the beach and were covered with blood."
Many people were lying on the ground, he said: "There is a lot of blood, a lot of screaming."
Israeli television also showed scenes of ambulances arriving at Eilat hospitals and unloading the injured, many of them bandaged and bloody.
Others, apparently in shock, were wheeled in on stretchers.
Israeli officials speculated Thursday night that militants, finding it increasingly difficult to attack Israelis in Israel itself, are choosing to attack them abroad.
But Egypt will not want the Israeli-Palestinian struggle to spill across the border and is expected by Israeli officials to move quickly to try to track down those responsible.
It estimated that over the past summer alone, around 300,000 Israelis took holidays in Sinai, replacing Turkey as Israelis' most popular tourist destination.
It estimated that over the past summer alone, around 300,000 Israelis took holidays in Sinai, thus replacing Turkey as Israelis' most popular tourist destination.
The power went off," a witness who gave his name as Eitan told Israeli radio.
The power went off," a witness who gave his name as Eitan told Israeli radio.
The power went off," an Israeli witness who gave his name as Eitan, told the radio.
The power went off," a witness who gave his name as Eitan told Israeli radio.
Israel also regularly complains that Egypt should do more to stop the smuggling of arms into Gaza and that Cairo does not take its security responsibilities seriously enough.
"I am standing in front of the hotel.
"I am standing in front of the hotel.
"I am standing in front of the hotel.
"The wall near me collapsed and people began to run."
"I saw bodies thrown into the sea," one firefighter told journalists after helping put out the fire at the Israeli-built hotel.
I pulled them out and we managed to leave the hotel.
Panicked Israelis rushed the border post, trying to flee Egypt, yelling at the border guards in Arabic that their belongings and documents were still in the burning hotel.
When asked if he wasn't afraid to travel to Sinai, Elkhin said: "I heard the alerts and warnings, but I never believed anything could ever happen there, because, after all, every one there is Israeli.
Yuval Steinitz, the chairman of parliament's foreign and defense committee, said: "What is sad is the fact that over recent months we have received incessant warnings concerning a possible attack in Sinai, and these warnings grew more and more clear, but the public failed to listen."
I heard a big explosion about 30 minutes ago that smashed all the windows.
I heard a big explosion about 30 minutes ago that smashed all the windows.
I heard a big explosion about 30 minutes ago that smashed all the windows.
Last month, the defense establishment cautioned Israelis against traveling to Sinai, following warnings of a potential terrorist attack.
Egypt threw up a security cordon around the blast sites in the Sinai -- renowned for its dramatic desert mountains and palm-fringed beaches -- and boosted airport security in Cairo.
Egypt threw up a security cordon around the blast sites in the Sinai -- renowned for its dramatic desert mountains and palm-fringed beaches -- and boosted airport security in Cairo.
The militants may also be trying to cause further strains between Israel and Egypt, which are trying to cooperate on the Israeli government plan for a unilateral withdrawal from the Gaza Strip.
But thousands of Israeli tourists are still drawn to the Sinai, especially for its outstanding Red Sea diving and its hotel casinos, banned in the Jewish state.
But thousands of Israeli tourists are still drawn to the Sinai, especially for its outstanding Red Sea diving and its hotel casinos, banned in the Jewish state.
The holiday this year began last week and ends Friday.
Hassan Elkhin told Israeli channel 10: "After the blast, parts of the wall and ceiling began to crumble.
Hadas Manor, an Israeli journalist staying at another Taba hotel, told Israeli television: "Most of the people here haven't come with their cars, so they depend on Egyptian taxis that are not operating now."
The walls around us collapsed, and there was fire around."
Israeli television interviewed a man who described the blast near Ras al-Sultan.
In 1997, after radicals attacked tourists in Luxor and killed nearly 70 people, Egypt cracked down hard on Islamic Jihad.
Taba is a small village dominated by the Hilton, originally built by the Israelis.
Israeli and Palestinian negotiators have met numerous times at the hotel for peace talks.
Ties between the two neighbours have soured since the start of the Palestinian intifada or uprising against Israeli occupation four years ago.
Ties between the two neighbours have soured since the start of the Palestinian intifada or uprising against Israeli occupation four years ago.
The attacks may also be intended to damage Egypt's tourism industry, on which it depends heavily.
"The electricity went out and rocks were jolted by the blast.
I ran to look for my friends and found them downstairs in the casino.
As he put her down, she collapsed, and medics rushed to her.
In November 2002, attackers drove a car bomb into a resort hotel popular with Israelis in Mombasa, Kenya, killing 12, and fired missiles at an Israeli charter jet, which only narrowly missed their target.
He suggested that al-Qaida, an offshoot or an Egyptian radical group might be responsible.