Carroll, 28, a freelance reporter working for the Christian Science Monitor, was seized by gunmen in Baghdad on January 7.
The Christian Science Monitor said it was urgently seeking information about its reporter after confirming her abduction on Monday.
Carroll, 28, a freelance reporter working for the Christian Science Monitor, was seized by gunmen on Saturday after calling by the office of a prominent Sunni politician in the neighbourhood.
The Christian Science Monitor newspaper on Monday pleaded for the release of American reporter Jill Carroll, seized in Baghdad by abductors who gunned down her Iraqi translator.
Jill Carroll, 28, a freelance reporter working for the Christian Science Monitor, was seized by gunmen on Saturday after calling by the office of a prominent Sunni politician, the US newspaper confirmed on Monday.
The station broadcast a brief videotape of the journalist Jill Carroll, 28, a freelance reporter working for the Christian Science Monitor who was seized by gunmen in Baghdad on January 7.
The US military said the raid was linked to the hunt for kidnapped Jill Carroll, a freelance journalist working for the Christian Science Monitor.
The Christian Science Monitor on Monday named a US journalist kidnapped in Iraq as freelancer Jill Carroll, who was on assignment for the US-based paper when she was seized.
About 700 people rallied in the gardens of the Umm al-Qura mosque in the west of the capital to denounce the raid carried out Saturday night by US and Iraqi forces.
The 28-year-old reporter was seized by gunmen on Saturday after calling by the office of a prominent Sunni politician in the neighbourhood.
The family of an electrical contractor believed killed by a militant group in Iraq is convinced he is dead, and is preparing a memorial service.
The incident was reported from Baghdad by AFP on Saturday, but the agency, in common with other foreign and US news outlets, did not identify Carroll in line with a Monitor request as efforts were launched to find her.
Carroll was abducted in western Baghdad on Saturday, by kidnappers who killed her Iraqi interpreter, the paper said in a statement, calling for her release.
Carroll, 28, a freelancer filing for the Boston,Massachusetts-based paper, was abducted in western Baghdad on Saturday, apparently on the way to interview a prominent Sunni politician.
Her interpreter, Allan Enwiyah, 32, was shot dead and his body abandoned nearby by the kidnappers, while her driver got away.
Carroll's interpreter, Allan Enwiyah, 32, was shot dead and his body abandoned nearby by the kidnappers during the abduction, while her driver got away.
Her interpreter, Allan Enwiyah, 32, was shot dead and his body abandoned nearby, while her driver got away.
Her interpreter, Allan Enwiyah, 32, was shot dead and his body abandoned nearby by the kidnappers, while her driver got away.
Waving banners and chanting anti-US slogans, about 700 people rallied in the gardens of the Umm al-Qura mosque in the west of the capital to denounce the Saturday night raid.
"This raid was conducted as a direct result of a tip by an Iraqi civilian that activities related to the kidnapping were being carried out inside the mosque," said Lieutenant-Colonel Barry Johnson, speaking of the abduction Saturday of Christian Science Monitor reporter Jill Carroll.
Carroll's driver, quoted in a story posted on the Monitor's website, said gunmen jumped in front of the car, pulled him from it, and drove off with their two captives all within 15 seconds.
Carroll's driver, quoted in a story posted on the Monitor's website on Monday, said gunmen jumped in front of her car screaming "Stop!
Several Westerners are currently being held hostage by insurgents in Iraq, including an American, a Briton and two Canadians who are members of a Christian peace group.
Several Westerners are currently being held hostage by insurgents in Iraq, including an American, a Briton and two Canadians who are members of a Christian peace group.
Several Westerners are currently being held hostage by insurgents in Iraq, including an American, a Briton and two Canadians who are members of a Christian peace group.
Carroll's driver, quoted in a story posted on the Monitor's website, said gunmen jumped in front of the car, pulled him from it, and drove off with their two captives all within 15 seconds.
Carroll's driver, quoted in a story posted on the Monitor's website, said gunmen jumped in front of the car, pulled him from it, and drove off with their two captives all within 15 seconds.
Several Westerners are currently being held hostage by insurgents in Iraq, including an American, a Briton and two Canadians who are members of a Christian peace group.
Several Westerners are currently being held hostage by insurgents in Iraq, including an American, a Briton and two Canadians who are members of a Christian peace group.
Carroll's driver, quoted in a story posted on the Monitor's website, said gunmen jumped in front of the car, pulled him from it, and drove off with their two captives all within 15 seconds.
``Jill is an innocent journalist and we respectfully ask that you please show her mercy and allow her to return home to her mother, sister and family,'' read the letter signed by her parents Jim and Mary Beth Carroll and her sister Katie.
Carroll was the 31st media worker to have been kidnapped in Iraq since the start of the war in 2003, according to watchdog group Reporters without Borders.
Carroll was the 31st media worker to have been kidnapped in Iraq since the start of the war in 2003, according to watchdog group Reporters without Borders.
Five of the journalist kidnap victims -- four Iraqis and Enzo Baldoni of Italy -- were killed by their abductors.
In other developments, a Polish soldier was wounded and two rebels killed during a raid carried out by coalition forces near the town of Hamza, south of Baghdad, Poland's PAP news agency reported Tuesday.
From that experience, she understands the hardships and suffering that the Iraqi people face every day," it said.
In Baghdad, two policemen were killed and two wounded in separate shooting incidents Tuesday, security officials said.
"Jill is a kind person whose love for Iraq and the Iraqi people are evident in her articles," the family statement said.
The group holding Carroll captive was not identified in the tape that was broadcast over Al-Jazeera.
Her family issued a statement Tuesday afternoon pleading for ``the speedy and safe return of our beloved daughter and sister.''
"Jill is an innocent journalist and we respectfully ask that you please show her mercy and allow her to return home to her mother, sister and family," Carroll's family said in a statement.
Coalition forces captured four suspects wanted over the killing of a Spanish officer in 2004.
In the United States, a new study co-authored by a Nobel Prize winning economist, claimed that -- in addition to the human cost of the war, with 2,209 US servicemen killed and over 16,000 wounded -- the Iraq campaign will likely cost the United States anywhere between one and two trillion dollars.
In Spain itself, police arrested 20 people across the country, mostly Moroccans, suspected of recruiting radical Islamist volunteers to fight in Iraq, national radio said.
Carroll was kidnapped Jan. 7 while on assignment and her captors had made no public comment or demand until the tape was shown Tuesday.
In the 20-second tape, Carroll was shown against a white background and appeared reasonably healthy, although tired.
The US embassy said it had nothing new to report on Carroll.
Ashraf Qazi, the UN special representative in Iraq, also deplored the raid.
David Cook, her newspaper's Washington bureau chief and spokesman, said that the paper has had no contact with the kidnappers.
Carroll was the 31st media worker to have been kidnapped in Iraq since the start of the war in 2003, according to watchdog group Reporters without Borders.
Five of the kidnap victims -- four Iraqis and Enzo Baldoni of Italy -- were killed by their abductors.
He landed at late Monday at a military base in France where he was met by his daugher and niece, along with Foreign Minister Philippe Douste-Blazy.
The hostage developments followed a twin suicide bombing against the Iraqi interior ministry that killed at least 28 policemen.
The Iraqi branch of Al-Qaeda claimed responsibility for the attack in an Internet message, saying it was to avenge the "torture" of Sunni Muslims in interior ministry facilities.
Some inmates had reportedly been tortured.
News organizations withheld details of her abduction for several days to allow time for her newspaper and family to seek her release.
Meanwhile in Washington, the White House Monday denied that the US government has been negotiating with insurgents and Saddam Hussein loyalists in Iraq, but acknowledged that it was reaching out to those who until now have rejected the political process.
"Part of our strategy, a critical element of our strategy, is to broaden participation in the political process," White House spokesman Scott McClellan told reporters.
"We have been reaching out to the rejectionists."
The spokesman was reacting to a New York Times report Saturday that said the United States has stepped up contact with some Iraqi insurgent groups in a bid to exploit tensions between home-grown rebels and foreign militant groups such as Al-Qaeda.
Washington wants to encourage the Sunni Arab minority to join in a government of national unity in a bid to undermine Sunni support for insurgents and allow for the start of withdrawal of US-led coalition forces.
In addition to the human cost of the war, with 2,209 US servicemen killed and over 16,000 wounded, the Iraq war will likely cost the United States anywhere between one and two trillion dollars, according to a new study co-authored by a Nobel Prize winning economist.
The research made public Monday by Joseph Stiglitz of Columbia University, a 2001 Nobel Prize laureate and former chief economist at the World Bank, and economy professor Linda Bilmes of Harvard University, argued that current official assessments of the war cost fail to consider key expenses likely to dog the US budget for years to come.
The demonstration came as Iraqis celebrated the Muslim Eid Al-Adha holiday a day after a twin suicide bombing at the interior ministry, claimed by Al-Qaeda, that left at least 28 policemen dead.
U.S. State Department spokesman Sean McCormack said the Bush administration was continuing ``to make every effort'' to free Carroll.
Six people were detained for questioning, he added.
The Sunni Committee of Muslim Scholars which is based at the mosque, confirmed that one of its members, Yunis Aikali, and five mosque guards were arrested in the raid.
In a statement, the committee also accused US soldiers of desecrating the mosque and carrying away files containing the names of members.
"We call on the occupiers to withdraw from Iraq because they are the reason for every crime and the death of every innocent in Iraq," Harith al-Aubaidi, a member of the committee said in his sermon at the prayers ahead of the protest.
"Both Iraqi and coalition forces raided the mosque in the early morning hours in order to minimize the impact on worshippers and the surrounding neighborhood," Johnson said.
No claim of responsibility has so far been issued in Carroll's case.
"Both Iraqi and coalition Forces raided the mosque in the early morning hours in order to minimize the impact on worshippers and the surrounding neighborhood," the military spokesman said.
Carroll is the 31st media worker to have been kidnapped in Iraq since the start of the war in 2003, according to watchdog group Reporters without Borders (Reporters sans Frontieres, or RSF).
"So when I was laid off from my reporting assistant job at the Wall Street Journal in August 2002, it seemed the right time to try to make it happen.
An Iraqi defence ministry official said Enwiyah was able to tell soldiers that Carroll had been kidnapped before he died.
and others jumped in and surrounded Carroll and Enwiyah.
"They didn't give me any time to even put the car in neutral," the driver, who requested anonymity, said.
"We had hoped his body would be found so that we could bring him home.
"It was very obvious this was by design.
The whole operation took no more than a quarter of a minute.
A guard outside Dulaimi's office told AFP on Saturday he heard gunshots fired a short distance away and rushed to find the body of a slain man.
"Although his face was not visible, there are enough consistencies between the two videos and enough evidence that my family, in our hearts, believe that Ron is dead," Schulz said.
Dulaimi however told AFP he had no appointment to meet a Western journalist.
Five of the kidnap victims -- four Iraqis and Enzo Baldoni of Italy -- were killed by their abductors.
In a dispatch for the American Journalism Review published last year, Carroll wrote that she moved to Jordan ahead of the US invasion of Iraq in 2003 to get a feel for the story.
While U.S. officials have not confirmed Shulz's death, his sister, Julie Schulz, said Tuesday night that the family identified him from two videos reportedly posted by the group.
"The interpreters death confirms that the Iraqi press continues to be the chief victim of the infernal climate for the media in this country."
Carroll, wearing a grey sweatshirt with her long brown hair loose, was shown alone in the video and speaking but there was no sound.
The video also showed Schulz's identity card.
His face was not shown and it was impossible to verify his identity.
The Qatar-based station said the kidnappers identified themselves as members of a previously unknown armed group calling itself the "Brigades of Vengeance".
The Islamic Army of Iraq claimed that it killed Ronald Schulz last month, and a video on a Web site, purportedly posted by the group, showed a blindfolded man being shot in the back of the head.
"Al-Jazeera reiterates its rejection and condemnation of all forms of violence targeting journalists, and demands the release of the US journalist Jill Carroll," the station said.
Carroll was the 31st media worker to have been kidnapped in Iraq since the start of the war in 2003, according to watchdog group Reporters without Borders.
Five of the kidnap victims -- four Iraqis and Enzo Baldoni of Italy -- were killed by their abductors.
"All I ever wanted to be was a foreign correspondent," she wrote.
"There was bound to be plenty of parachute journalism once the war started, and I didn't want to be a part of that."
"There can be no stability as long as Iraq is occupied," he added.
Carroll had reported from the Middle East for Jordanian, Italian and other news organizations for the last three years, the paper said.
Insurgents have kidnapped more than 250 foreigners in the past two years, aiming to force U.S.-led troops to leave Iraq or prevent Arab nations from strengthening their ties with the Baghdad government.
"We call on the occupiers to withdraw from Iraq because they are the reason for every crime and the death of every innocent in Iraq," Harith al-Aubaidi, a member of the scholars' committee, said in his sermon at the prayer meeting.
Six people were detained for questioning, he added.
The UN special representative in Iraq, Ashraf Qazi, also deplored the raid.
The Sunni Committee of Muslim Scholars, which is based at the mosque, confirmed that one of its members, Yunis Aikali, and five mosque guards were arrested in the raid.
Carroll was the 31st media worker to have been kidnapped in Iraq since the start of the war in 2003, according to watchdog group Reporters without Borders.
In a statement, the committee also accused US soldiers of desecrating the mosque and carrying away files containing the names of members.
"In recent months, the Monitor has tapped into her professionalism, energy, and fair reporting on the Iraqi scene," the Monitor statement said.
"It was her drive to gather direct and accurate views from political leaders that took her into western Baghdad's Adil neighborhood on Saturday morning."
"This again underlines the importance of all parties respecting the sanctity of holy sites and places of worship," he said in a statement.
Frenchman Bernard Planche, a 52-year-old engineer, managed to evade his captors on Saturday.
"This again underlines the importance of all parties respecting the sanctity of holy sites and places of worship," he said in a statement.
Frenchman Bernard Planche, a 52-year-old engineer, managed to evade his captors on the very day Carroll was abducted.
Frenchman Bernard Planche, a 52-year-old engineer, held hostage for over a month and who managed to evade his captors on Saturday, was debriefed Tuesday by the DGSE foreign intelligence agency at a base near the Loire Valley city of Orleans.
"Journalists working in Iraq have once again been caught in a deadly ambush," the group said in a statement.
Her translator was shot dead but her driver was set free.
Her interpreter was shot dead during the abduction, while her driver got away.
Officials in Baghdad and the Monitor said Carroll was seized as she was on her way to interview prominent Sunni Arab politician Adnan al-Dulaimi.
US forces have been hunting for the woman, and one day last week raided a mosque in the west of the capital after a tip that "activities related to the kidnapping were being carried out inside," triggering angry protests from Sunni Muslim clerics.
Most recently, Jill Carroll, an American freelance reporter, was kidnapped in Baghdad shortly after she was leading office of a leading Sunni politician.
"We are urgently seeking information about Ms Carroll and are pursuing every avenue to secure her release," Monitor editor Richard Bergenheim said last week.
"We are urgently seeking information about Ms Carroll and are pursuing every avenue to secure her release," said Monitor editor Richard Bergenheim.
"We are urgently seeking information about Ms Carroll and are pursuing every avenue to secure her release," said Monitor editor Richard Bergenheim.
"We are urgently seeking information about Ms. Carroll and are pursuing every avenue to secure her release," said Monitor editor Richard Bergenheim.
The incident had previously been reported from Baghdad, but Carroll had not been identified.
The incident was reported by AFP on Saturday, but the agency, in common with other foreign and US news outlets, did not identify Carroll in line with a Monitor request as efforts were launched to find her.
Shulz, 40, was working as an electrical contractor when he was kidnapped.
The family is planning a memorial service on Jan. 14.
The body of her interpreter, Allan Enwiyah, 32, was later found in the same neighborhood.
"She has been welcomed into the homes of many Iraqis and shown every courtesy.
"Jill is a friend and sister to many Iraqis and has been dedicated to bringing the truth of the Iraq war to the world."
``Jill is a friend and sister to many Iraqis and has been dedicated to bringing the truth of the Iraq war to the world.''
The paper quoted unidentified relatives of Carroll as pleading for her release and asking her captors to "consider the work she has done to reveal the truth about the Iraq war."
Arabic television Al-Jazeera said Tuesday the kidnappers of a US woman journalist abducted in Baghdad had threatened to kill her if female prisoners in Iraq were not freed within 72 hours.
The family of Jill Carroll, a US woman journalist abducted in Iraq, issued an emotional appeal Monday for her release after her captors threatened her with execution.
"The attack on the Umm al-Qura mosque is an attack on Muslims and Islam," read one of the banners at the protest.
"The attack on the Umm al-Qura mosque is an attack on Muslims and Islam," said banners held up by protesters at Tuesday's rally which followed morning prayers.
RSF renewed its call for Carroll's release on Monday, and bemoaned the dangers faced by reporters in Baghdad.
Lieutenant Colonel Barry Johnson, a US military spokesman, said the raid was ordered "as a direct result of a tip by an Iraqi civilian that activities related to the kidnapping were being carried out inside the mosque."
Although the 28-year-old Christian Science Monitor reporter appeared to be talking on the tape, her words were not audible.
Earlier, the Qatar-based Arabic television station Al-Jazeera showed a videotape of Carroll taken by her kidnappers, who said they would kill her if female prisoners in Iraq were not freed within 72 hours.
An Arab television network ran a video showing kidnapped journalist Jill Carroll Tuesday with an accompanying message from her unnamed captors that she would be killed unless the United States freed all female prisoners in Iraq within 72 hours.
Angry Sunni Arabs protested Tuesday at a raid on a Baghdad mosque by US and Iraqi soldiers looking for a kidnapped US woman reporter, the latest victim in a series of abductions of Westerners in Iraq.
Blanche, who escaped from a farmhouse west of the capital, said he was "delighted to return to civilisation and to French soil."
It was the first time she has been since since her disappearance.
Iraqi security forces, meanwhile, were on alert in western Baghdad looking for hostages, security sources said.
"The Monitor joins Jill's colleagues -- Iraqi and foreign -- in the Baghdad press in calling for her immediate and safe release," the paper said in a statement which named Carroll for the first time.
Sunni Arab Muslims protested Tuesday a raid by US forces on a Baghdad mosque reportedly linked to the kidnapping of a US reporter.
Abuse scandals came to the fore in November and December when US and Iraqi forces discovered two overcrowded interior ministry detention centres.
An Al-Jazeera news reader said that the network has appealed for Carroll's release.
Iraqi and US investigators were hunting Tuesday for a US journalist kidnapped in Baghdad as a French hostage who escaped after five weeks of captivity in Iraq arrived back in France.