Jackson, freed on a 3-million-dollar bail, is scheduled to stand trial on Jan. 31 on a 10-count indictment that charges him with child molestation and conspiracy to kidnap.
A judge Thursday agreed to postpone the trial date for a lawsuit brought by Michael Jackson and his former lawyer over the alleged secret recording of them on a charter jet as the singer flew to be booked on child molestation charges.
California's attorney general has urged the judge in the Michael Jackson child molestation case to reject a bid by the pop star to remove the Santa Barbara County prosecutor's office from the case.
"Evidence of the movement of cash (is) consistent with count one of the indictment" against Jackson, Zonen told the court as prosecutors and Jackson's lawyers haggled over what evidence should be allowed at trial.
Santa Barbara County prosecutors conducted search of Jackson's Neverland ranch in the county and charged Jackson with molesting the boy shown in the documentary after a doctor tipped the police.
Jackson is also facing child molestation charges and has pleaded not guilty.
Jackson has pleaded innocent to a 10-count indictment that accused him child abuse, plying the boy with alcohol to seduce him and with counts of conspiring to kidnap and illegally imprison the youth and his family.
The "King of Pop" was arrested last November and the scheduled start of his trial is January 31.
Jackson fans and those close to the embattled entertainer told AFP they had no idea what authorities were looking for in their renewed search of Neverland, but said the raid was a clear sign that prosecutors lack evidence against Jackson.
Investigators took DNA from pop star Michael Jackson's mouth Saturday, a day after raiding his Neverland Ranch to prepare for his trial on child molestation charges, a family source said Sunday.
Jackson and his three children left the ranch on Thursday for a trip to the Nevada gambling getaway of Las Vegas, Angel and other members of the Jackson family entourage told AFP.
Jackson, 45, has pleaded not guilty to a 10-count indictment that included charges of child molestation.
Jackson turned himself in two days after the initial November 18, 2003 swoop on his rural estate and was later charged with having molested a 12-year-old boy at Neverland in February and March of last year.
Police and investigators probing child molestation charges against superstar Michael Jackson on Friday launched a fresh search on his famed Neverland Ranch, detectives said.
"And I also want to make it clear that it's not just about Michael Jackson but about a pattern of disrespect that he has shown to our community," Jackson said of the white rapper.
The raid is one of a number of searches that have been carried out on various locations linked to Jackson since he was arrested on November 20 last year.
His lawyers have complained that investigations and searches are still being carried out in the case more than a year after Jackson was arrested and charged, delaying progress in the case.
Jackson's legal team has accused prosecutor Tom Sneddon of waging a vendetta against the pop icon, despite a lack of evidence in the case.
Jackson's legal team has accused prosecutor Tom Sneddon of waging a vendetta against the pop icon, despite a lack of evidence in the case.
An attorney who has represented Michael Jackson for more than a decade has left the pop star's defense team, Jackson said.
"The DNA swab was done on Saturday in Michael's house at the ranch," the source said.
Jackson and his three children -- aged 7, 6 and 2 -- were all at the ranch when dozens of sheriff's deputies armed with two search warrants arrived early Friday, the source said.
A record of the alleged December 2003 transaction was discovered in documents seized in a search of the home of Jackson's personal assistant, the court heard.
He refused to comment further on the surprise search of Neverland that came as lawyers prepare to take the case to trial.
In a motion filed Thursday, Lockyer responded that Jackson's lawyers failed to show the district attorney's "zeal" in prosecuting the charges stemmed from anything but an "impartial consideration of the case."
Jackson fans close to the family said the pop star and his children spent Friday in the gambling getaway of Las Vegas in neighboring Nevada state.
Jackson has denied 10 counts that include allegations that he molested a 12-year-old boy at Neverland Ranch in February and March of last year.
Jackson has pleaded not guilty to child molestation, conspiracy and administering an intoxicating agent, alcohol.
Jackson has pleaded not guilty to child molestation, conspiracy and administering an intoxicating agent, alcohol.
A 26-year-old Canadian man has pleaded guilty to emailing a death threat to pop superstar Michael Jackson, police said Tuesday.
In that raid, investigators seized a large number of items to be used in evidence against him, including the top layer of a mattress that was used in the mansion.
Jury selection in the celebrity trial was due to begin in Santa Maria, south of Neverland, on January 31.
The "King of Pop" was not present at the ranch, named after the home of the eternally youthful children's literary character Peter Pan, when police swooped, Jackson's entourage told AFP.
Michael Jackson's feud with Eminem spilled on to the streets of New York on Thursday as the self-styled King of Pop's fans listened to their hero slam the rapper during a protest over a music video depicting a Jackson look-alike in a bed with children.
A son of late acting legend Marlon Brando was implicated in an alleged plot by Michael Jackson to kidnap the boy who accused him of child molestation, a court heard Friday.
He has pleaded innocent and is free on three million dollars bail.
Steve Cochran took a "temporary leave of absence" from the team defending Jackson from child molestation charges, but will continue to "collaborate" with lead attorney Thomas Mesereau Jr., Jackson said Friday.
Jury selection for his trial is due to begin in Santa Maria on January 31.
The trial date was postponed due to the singer's criminal case, which is scheduled for trial in January, and because Geragos is representing Scott Peterson, the murder defendant accused of killing his wife and their unborn son.
In a separate statement, Mesereau denied rumors that there was animosity between him and Cochran.
"It's demeaning and disrespectful," Jackson told Fox News in a live telephone call heard by his fans through speakers.
He told his fans: "I love them so much."
In the irreverent song, the always controversial Eminem says: "Come here little kiddie, on my lap.
Jackson bought 20 items, including a malachite urn, a Louis XVI-style bust clock, silver bread holder and an "Austrian gold-painted dancing girl," the complaint said.
Mayfair Gallery sells mostly 19th-century European furniture.
"In sum, all of the defendant's baseless allegations are based on surmise, conjecture and unfounded speculation," Lockyer wrote.
: one name), who heads the Friends of Michael Jackson Committee.
State Attorney General Bill Lockyer called the request "baseless" and said it was premised on "conjecture and unfounded speculation."
In April, Jackson fired Mark Geragos and Benjamin Brafman, replacing the two famous attorneys with Mesereau.
"The cops were there all day, until 5:15 pm.
He called Cochran a friend, "brilliant lawyer, and a great credit to our profession."
Jackson's attorneys were particularly concerned about what they decried as Sneddon's "smug" and "jocular" manner during a news conference in which he announced Jackson's arrest.
The videotaping surfaced when representatives of XtraJet showed the video to several news organizations, claiming they found the tapes aboard one of their jets.
"He continues to be my friend and close adviser."
Jackson's attorney's won a temporary restraining order against XtraJet that barred any release of the tapes.
"Attorney Tom Mesereau was with Michael when they did it."
The bombshell was dropped during a pre-trial hearing in Jackson's child molestation case when prosecutors revealed they had recently discovered documents linking Miko Brando with the alleged crime.
Jackson, 46, is charged with having molested a 12-year-old cancer survivor at Neverland in February and March 2003.
But Jackson lawyer Robert Sanger, arguing that the financial record should not be seen by Jackson's trial jury, said the payment proved nothing.
In the documentary, Jackson appeared on camera holding hands with a 12-year-old boy with whom the singer admitted sharing his bedroom.
Count one on the 10-count criminal indictment alleges that Jackson and co-conspirators planned to abduct a child, to falsely imprison someone and to extort someone.
While details of the indictment remain secret under a strict gag order in the case, the charges are thought to involve an alleged plot to abduct Jackson's young accuser, his younger brother and the boys' mother.
Jackson, 46, who is awaiting trial on child molestation charges, wants the rapper's "Just Lose It" video, which shows a Jackson look-alike on a bed surrounded by children, taken off the air.
Jackson's attorney Steve Cochran, in a motion filed Oct. 8, accused Sneddon of having a vendetta against Jackson dating back to a 1993 molestation investigation that never resulted in charges being filed.
He was arrested on November 19, 2003 freed on three million dollars' bail.
The team of Cochran and Robert Sanger had worked for Jackson in lesser roles throughout the case.
Police arrested Poffley in August, and charged him with uttering death threats after a joint investigation with police in Santa Barbara County, California.
Geragos is no longer representing Jackson, but was his lawyer in November when Jackson flew from Las Vegas to surrender.
A former business associate of US pop singer Michael Jackson has filed a lawsuit against the entertainer for breaching contract, local media reported Wednesday.
An attorney for Jackson, Brian Oxman, said he had not reviewed the complaint.
The lawsuit was filed in Los Angeles Superior Court by Marc Schaffel, who is seeking 3 million US dollars for unpaid loans, cash advances and producing fees.
They wanted to know whether it was legal to distribute or sell them.
"He needs to stop it, and he needs to stop it now."
"Like other proceedings involving Michael Jackson, we'll look at it carefully and deal with it in a professional manner," Oxman said.
It was that documentary, aired on ABC and British television in February 2003, that led to public fury about Jackson's dubious relationship with children and sparked calls for an investigation against Jackson.
Jackson also wanted to avoid giving a deposition for the trial, but the judge denied that request, Kabateck said.
As with the majority of documents in the case, Lockyer's full motion was sealed but an edited version was posted on the court's Web site.
And I don't mean rap, as in a case of child molestation."
His lawyers have complained that investigations and searches are still being carried out more than a year after Jackson was arrested and charged, delaying progress in the case.
Brando, 44, the son of the Oscar-winning movie giant, works as a security guard for the "King of Pop" and received a 20,000-dollar petty cash payment from Jackson, prosecutor Ronald Zonen told Judge Rodney Melville.
Superior Court Judge Soussan G. Bruguera moved the trial date from November to May 23 over the protests of XtraJet.
Tom agreed to bring Michael back on Saturday to provide the DNA," the source added.
They acted after a threatening email arrived at the Santa Maria Court House where Jackson was due to appear.
"At around 9:00 am (1700 GMT), sheriff investigators served a search warrant at Neverland Ranch ... as part of an ongoing criminal investigation," said Santa Barbara Sheriff's Department spokesman Chris Pappas said.
The reason a warrant was issued for the latest search was not immediately clear.
Police Friday spent eight hours combing Jackson's ranch, which lies about 160 kilometers (100 miles) north of Los Angeles, Chris Pappas of the Santa Barbara Sheriff's Department confirmed.
A reason for the departure was not released.
The lawsuit alleges that XtraJet "intentionally and surreptitiously videotaped and recorded" Jackson and Geragos, including the recording of "privileged attorney-client communications."
It was the second legal action against Jackson this week alleging he failed to pay bills.
Mesereau declined further comment when contacted by The Associated Press.
Schaffel claims that he helped Jackson make a pair of Fox television specials to rebut a controversial TV documentary that took a critical look at the singer's eccentric lifestyle.
The judge also granted Jackson's request to remove his claims of emotional distress.
Jackson's lawyers allege that District Attorney Tom Sneddon is "blinded by his zeal to convict Michael Jackson," creating a conflict of interest that would prevent Jackson from receiving a fair trial.
"They think the DA (district attorney) doesn't have enough evidence, and is trying to get more evidence," she told AFP.
Mesereau rushed from Los Angeles via helicopter to help his client and arranged for Jackson and his children to leave until the raid was over.
A message left after business hours at Cochran's Los Angeles office was not immediately returned.
"I would like to thank attorney Steve Cochran for all of the hard work he has done on my behalf," Jackson said in a statement released by his spokeswoman.
Jackson and attorney Mark Geragos sued XtraJet Inc. in November, alleging they were videotaped without their knowledge on a flight to Santa Barbara so Jackson could surrender on the charges.
J. Marc Schaffel, a former producer and business associate, sued the singer Tuesday, claiming Jackson owes him more than US$3 million (euro2.3 million) in loans and producing fees.
They didn't know this was going to happen today.
Black Entertainment Television (BET) agreed to stop broadcasting the video, but MTV has balked at Jackson's request.
"There is nothing unusual with someone like Michael Jackson, with such a large operation like Neverland, to have 20,000 dollars in cash delivered to them for the purpose of running their daily affairs," Sanger said.
Guess who's back with a brand new rap?
Lockyer wrote that even if Sneddon had personal animosity toward Jackson, that would not be enough to show a conflict of interest or warrant his removal.
An initial swoop on the sprawling estate in California took place just over a year ago.
Adrian Poffley received a conditional discharge and 12 months probation after appearing in court Monday in Kitchener, Ontario, west of Toronto, said Waterloo police Staff Sergeant Bryan Larkin.
About 20 Jackson fans stood before MTV's studios in Times Square as Jackson blasted Eminem and his video.
"I've been talking to the family," said Angel (Eds.
An antiques and furniture store has sued pop star Michael Jackson for allegedly failing to pay a nearly US$180,000 (euro138,000) bill.
"Michael's children were traumatized.
The change prevents attorneys from asking Jackson any questions about his mental state, said Geragos' attorney, Brian Kabateck.
Kamad Enterprise, which owns Mayfair Gallery, claimed Jackson owes US$178,875 (euro137,340) of the US$378,875 (euro290,905) in merchandise he allegedly purchased in May, according to a complaint filed Thursday in Los Angeles Superior Court.
XtraJet's attorney, Lloyd Kirschbaum called the lawsuit a "publicity stunt."