In his e-mail, Westin wrote, "It's both Peter's and my expectation that he will anchor 'World News Tonight' during the period of treatment to the extent he can do so comfortably; but, we should also expect him to be off the broadcast from time to time, depending on how he feels."
ABC News President David Westin told the network's staff that he and Jennings expect the anchor to continue the newscast during his treatment ``to the extent he can do so comfortably.''
The future of the iconic American anchorman was on the minds of many this week as the news that Peter Jennings had been diagnosed with lung cancer raised concerns that he wouldn't be able to continue as anchor at ABC News.
In an e-mail message to his staff on Tuesday, David Westin, the president of ABC News, praised Jennings for his leadership of the news division over the years and expressed the division's support as he encountered this challenge.
ABC executives stress that Jennings is still the anchor of ``World News Tonight'' and will do the broadcast whenever he feels up to it.
The news that Peter Jennings will be absent from "World News Tonight" for an indeterminate period while he is being treated for lung cancer has, at least from a business perspective, had its most profound impact on Jennings' ultimate boss, David Westin, the president of ABC News.
ABC News anchor Peter Jennings has been diagnosed with lung cancer, the network announced Tuesday, and will immediately begin a round of outpatient chemotherapy that is expected to keep him from the anchor desk at times in the coming months.
He broke the news to his senior staff at ``World News Tonight'' in an e-mail Tuesday morning, saying he hoped to continue to anchor throughout his treatment.
"World News Tonight" anchor Peter Jennings has lung cancer, ABC announced Tuesday, but plans to remain on the job throughout his treatment.
E-mail messages released Tuesday by Jennings and ABC News president David Westin stressed that Jennings, who is 66 and who has anchored ABC's "World News Tonight" since 1983, will continue to work during treatment, provided he feels well enough.
Jennings joined ABC News in 1964 and served as the anchor of "ABC Evening News" from 1965 to 1968.
Peter Jennings, the sole anchor of the ABC evening newscast for the past 22 years, announced Tuesday that he was suffering from lung cancer and had begun treatment.
Peter Jennings, the last of the three major anchors of his era who is still working on a nightly newscast, revealed Tuesday that he has lung cancer and that he will begin chemotherapy next week.
While the announcement of Jennings' illness hit the already unsettled world of network news with even more turbulence, it also jolted television viewers, stripping them -- at least for a time -- of the last of the three familiar faces that had anchored the evening news for the past two decades.
He added that Jennings would undergo outpatient treatment in New York and would continue to work on the newscast "to the extent he can do so comfortably."
He was foreign desk anchor for "World News Tonight" from 1978 to 1983, the year he was named the program's anchor and senior editor.
Charles Gibson, Vargas and others will substitute for Jennings from time to time, said ABC News President David Westin.
``We are enormously grateful for the loyalty of our audience, and we expect they will continue to get their news from Peter Jennings,'' ABC News spokesman Jeffrey Schneider said.
Peter Jennings, the last of the three long-dominant network anchors still on the job, said Tuesday he has been diagnosed with lung cancer.
The dramatic news - which comes on the heels of last week's announcement that "Nightline" host Ted Koppel will leave at year's end and which follows the recent departures of CBS and NBC anchors Dan Rather and Tom Brokaw - reinforces the idea that a chapter in television journalism is coming to an end.
In his e-mail to the staff, Westin said that when Jennings is unable to work, Vargas and "Good Morning America" cohost Charles Gibson would be among the substitutes.
Jennings, who has anchored ``World News Tonight'' since 1983, led the newscast Friday and is expected to do so again tonight.
His illness may sideline, at least temporarily, one of the last remaining lions of network news, coming on the heels of the departures of NBC anchor Tom Brokaw and CBS anchor Dan Rather from their evening newscasts.
Jennings has been the face of ABC News for much of his 40-year career there, first as anchor from 1965 to 1968, in what he has described as an unsuccessful tenure, then as part of a three-man anchor team in 1978 before becoming solo anchor again in 1983.
Westin wrote that the anchor would undergo outpatient treatment in New York and that "we should also expect him to be off the broadcast from time to time."
Another television veteran, Ted Koppel, announced last week that he was leaving ABC and ``Nightline'' at the end of the year.
Jennings, 66, plans to begin chemotherapy and to continue to anchor ABC's ``World News Tonight'' when he can, but specialists said the decision to forgo surgery suggests a more advanced form of cancer for which long-term survival rates are relatively low.
After the long goodbye of NBC's Tom Brokaw (who served from 1983 until December), and the forced retirement of CBS' besieged Dan Rather (in harness from 1981 until March), the departure of the 66-year-old Jennings (sole anchor since 1978) would complete a clean sweep of the venerable troika from the erstwhile Big Three.
``But we should also expect him to be off the broadcast from time to time, depending on how he feels,'' Westin wrote in an e-mail to the entire staff, adding that Charlie Gibson and Elizabeth Vargas, among others, would substitute for Jennings.
Jennings was unable to anchor the ABC newscast on Tuesday night, though he had originally planned to.
Jennings is the last of the anchor troika that dominated U.S. broadcast network news divisions over the last two decades.
But he was unable to deliver the news last week because of a hoarse voice, and it remains unclear how frequently he will be on the air.
Peter Jennings, in a statement read Friday night on ABC's ``World News Tonight,'' shared with viewers his feelings about his battle with lung cancer and expressed gratitude for the support he has received from fans and friends.
Peter Jennings revealed that he is suffering from lung cancer and plans to continue on "World News Tonight" as much as possible after beginning chemotherapy next week.
I will continue to do the broadcast; on good days my voice will not always be like this.''
"I will continue to do the broadcast," he said.
ABC News President David Westin said in a note to the staff that ``Peter's been given a tough assignment.
In the short run, the absence of Jennings threatens to undermine one of the chief goals Westin has set for his news division this year: to overtake its main rival, "NBC Nightly News," at a moment of potential vulnerability for NBC -- just as Brian Williams has lost some of the audience he inherited in December from Tom Brokaw.
I will continue to do the broadcast.
``This is a body blow to ABC and to aficionados of evening news,'' he said.
A former smoker who quit some years ago, Jennings will begin outpatient chemotherapy treatment next week in New York, but he intends to continue broadcasting as his health permits.
Jennings has been ABC's sole evening anchor ever since.
Jennings said he was surprised at how fast the news traveled and at the kindness he had received from so many people.
But the network, which has seen the recent replacement of anchors at NBC and CBS as an opportunity for Jennings to vault into the ratings leadership, is planning to use substitute anchors, including Charles Gibson and Elizabeth Vargas, in his absence.
The first message was posted just six minutes after the news broke April 5 that ABC anchor Peter Jennings had been diagnosed with lung cancer.
While still in his 20s, Jennings anchored ABC's evening news for two years in the 1960s.
ABC said Jennings, 66, would work as often as he could during his course of treatment.
After a four-month period in which Tom Brokaw retired at NBC, Dan Rather relinquished the anchor chair at CBS and Ted Koppel said he was leaving ABC, Jennings's illness underscored the generational shift underway at the broadcast networks.
ABC's "World News Tonight" is currently in second place in the nightly news wars, but it has been breathing down the neck of the ratings leader, "NBC Nightly News."
Viewer reaction to his illness underscored the challenge facing the networks as they usher in a new generation of evening news anchors: replicating the strong bonds that have developed between audiences and the iconic faces of ABC, NBC and CBS.
``These are the type of interactions that have to be developed over time,'' said Jeffrey McCall, a professor of communications at Depauw University in Greencastle, Ind., who noted that competitive pressures from all-news cable channels, the Internet and other news sources limit the amount of time new anchors have to bond with their audiences.
NBC's Tom Brokaw stepped down last year and CBS' Dan Rather left last month.
That treatment worked for a time, but as Jennings acknowledged in his commentary on Tuesday night, he returned to regular smoking after the terrorist attacks in 2001.
The 66-year-old newsman, who smoked when he was younger, had been feeling ill during the last several days and was diagnosed Monday afternoon.
ABC News emphasized that Jennings would remain its evening news anchor.
Jennings has not anchored the newscast since April 1.
``The illusion that television has created is that we experience events, and the people that bring us through, that are our guides, are the network anchors,'' said Gary Edgerton, a professor at Old Dominion University in Norfolk, Va., and co-editor of the Journal of Popular Film and Television.
Even as he began treatment last week as an outpatient, Jennings remained a presence on "World News Tonight," albeit backstage.
He and ABC News President David Westin sent e-mails to their newsroom colleagues about the diagnosis, which Jennings received Monday.
Jennings has also been encouraged by Westin and Banner to come in and reclaim the anchor chair on any night he feels up to it, with as little as 45 minutes' notice.
He added: "We expect him to be the anchor for many years to come."
"He's already bringing to this new challenge the courage and strength we've seen so often in his reporting from the field and in anchoring ABC News," Westin told ABC staffers.
He's already bringing to this new challenge the courage and strength we've seen so often in his reporting from the field and in anchoring ABC News.''
``He's already bringing to this new challenge the courage and strength we've seen so often in his reporting from the field and in anchoring ABC News.
But TV news veterans said the network must consider who will take over if Jennings is unable to continue.
``Peter is part of the DNA of ABC News,'' said spokesman Jeffrey Schneider.
Doctors said most lung cancer patients can continue to work throughout treatment, but need flexibility to take it easy on days they are not feeling well.
NBC's Tom Brokaw signed off in December.
Once the main source of news for TV watchers, these network anchors have lost viewers over the past decade because of the proliferation of alternate news resources on cable TV and the Internet.
"I know that all of us will give him every bit of support that he needs and asks for."
I know that all of us will give him every bit of support that he needs and asks for.
Charles Gibson, Elizabeth Vargas and others will substitute for Jennings as necessary.
Westin said Charlie Gibson, Elizabeth Vargas and others would fill in for Jennings when necessary.
Jennings still hopes to lead the newscast throughout his chemotherapy.
Charles Gibson, co-host of ``Good Morning America,'' and ``20/20'' co-anchor Elizabeth Vargas, who are filling in for Jennings temporarily, are considered possible permanent replacements for the longtime anchor, along with ``World News Tonight Saturday'' anchor Bob Woodruff and chief White House correspondent Terry Moran.
The 66-year-old anchorman had announced on April 6 that he was diagnosed with the disease and shortly thereafter began treatment.
The news comes at a time when Jennings remains virtually the last of the longtime network anchors.
Since Brokaw's departure in December, Jennings has brought his newscast close to the top-rated ``NBC Nightly News'' in the Nielsens.
When he can't, he still plans to exert a strong force in shaping the newscast.
"On good days, my voice will not always be like this.
On good days, my voice will not always be like this.
Jennings had planned to anchor Tuesday night's newscast, but decided an hour before airtime that his voice was too weak.
He quit at that time, though the colleagues said it was an enormous struggle for him and periodically he was known to sneak a cigarette or two.
Peter will once again lead the way, but we will stand with him at every turn.''
"Peter will once again lead the way but we will stand with him at every turn," Westin said.
Vargas and Charles Gibson, co-host of ``Good Morning America,'' have substituted for him.
``In all the years I have worked here I have had the most outstanding support from this news division,'' he wrote.
Jennings decided late Tuesday not to anchor Tuesday night's program and was replaced by "20/20" coanchor Elizabeth Vargas.
In his own e-mail to his colleagues, Jennings said: "There will be good days and bad, which means that some days I may be cranky and some days really cranky!
Koppel, who plans to leave ABC in December over plans to make ``Nightline'' a live, hour-long broadcast, has filled in for Jennings but never expressed interest in being a permanent evening anchor.
Indeed, there was ample evidence last week that viewers greatly value the intimacy and confidence they have felt with Jennings, who has anchored ``World News Tonight'' for 22 years.
Until now, there has not been much public discussion about an eventual successor to Jennings, who has worked at ABC News since 1964.
He begins treatment in New York next week.
Although the five-year survival rate for men with operable lung cancer is 45 percent, he said, it is under 14 percent for more advanced cancer that cannot be removed.
In 1981, the same year that Rather edged out the eminence gris, a more significant milestone in the annals of anchordom appeared on screen: CNN, the beginning of 24-hour news and the end of the networks' monopoly.
Yet it also is hard not to get a little sentimental over the end of a tradition that well-served the news, and, on occasion, the nation.
And I hope it goes without saying that a journalist who doesn't value -- deeply -- the audience's loyalty should be in another line of work."
"You really wonder, if given this kind of narrowcasting environment, we'll ever see people of this iconic stature again in the news business."
Instinctively, immediately, we gave each other a hug -- a real hug -- and went on our respective ways knowing that we had been strengthened by the connection.''
``Yesterday, I decided to go to the office; I live only a few blocks away.
"Jennings has served American broadcast news with a graceful internationalist intelligence," said Rich Hanley, director of graduate programs at Quinnipiac University's school of communications.
Times staff writers Scott Collins and Mary MacVean contributed to this report.
With his very visible position on television each night, Jennings could be an inspiration for many others going through a similar fight, said Dr. David Johnson, chief of oncology and hematology at the Vanderbilt University School of Medicine.
"Finally," he said, "I wonder if other men and women ask their doctors right away: `OK, doc, when does the hair go?"
And I hope it goes without saying that a journalist who doesn't value _ deeply _ the audience's loyalty should be in another line of work."
"He's e-mailing; he's suggesting stories," Banner said.
"Peter Jennings is one of the few anchors that people almost invariably say, 'Yes, I could see sitting down and having a drink with him and talking casually about issues.'
Steve Murray writes for The Atlanta Journal-Constitution.
Serious but sympathetic, the timbre of his voice is a firm tenor or a stentorian baritone, perhaps a bit tense in dire straits, but never panicky.
Closing out the night watch, his signature sign-off sounds like a benediction.
A second-grade teacher from Wilmington, N. C., said Jennings' demeanor ``gave your viewers a sense of peace, that everything would eventually be better than it was at that moment'' and helped ``explain the unexplainable to our children.''
When he moved from radio to TV, his visible presence only intensified the emotional link: the movie star looks, the patrician manner, the cigarette smoke swirling around his head like incense.
On March 9, 1954, when Murrow delivered a slashing broadside at Sen. Joseph McCarthy, he was cashing in a lifetime of moral capital accrued from Munich to Panmunjom.
The winner of 14 Emmy Awards, he has reported from all 50 states and hosted specials such as ``Peter Jennings Reporting,'' ``The Search for Jesus,'' ``The Kennedy Assassination -- Beyond Conspiracy'' and, more recently, one on UFOs.
Because of his limited education, Jones said, ``he took that spot as anchor with some trepidation.''
And the evening news franchise itself, less lucrative than the popular morning shows, is often derided as an anachronism with an aging core of loyal viewers.
ABC, despite a stable of high-priced stars like Koppel and Barbara Walters, never groomed an obvious young successor to Jennings.
I wonder if other men and women ask their doctors right away, `OK, Doc, when does the hair go?'''
Cronkite's iconic bearing of the bad news (``From Dallas, Texas, a flash, apparently official.
...'') has long since become audiovisual shorthand for the moment of impact: pulling off his glasses, choking up, stoically going forward.
Like Murrow, Cronkite spent his capital carefully, trading on his cheerleading for NASA to cover his flanks when he turned against the Vietnam War after the 1968 Tet offensive.
A network spokeswoman declined to identify the location, citing his privacy.
``So many experiences have meant something special.
At one point, Jennings and his executive producer then, Paul Friedman, visited a hypnotist in Boston seeking to break their addictions to cigarettes.
"Overall, we're still having a hard time with it, mainly because we're not finding it in an early phase."
"I think it says you shouldn't stop your life if you have cancer.
It was around this time that Cronkite earned his sobriquet as ``the most trusted man in America,'' not as impressive as it sounds given the competition.
Veteran correspondent Bob Schieffer was picked to fill the slot on an interim basis when Rather departed last month.
Jennings, ABC's chief anchorman since 1983, was replaced by Elizabeth Vargas on Tuesday but taped a message telling viewers about his diagnosis.
Dan Rather left his desk at CBS a month ago.
CBS tapped a veteran newsman, Bob Schieffer, to temporarily replace Dan Rather when he left the newscast last month.
"It's a very dynamic time at ABC News," said Paul Slavin, a senior vice president in the division.
Michael Thun, vice president of epidemiology for the American Cancer Society, said that ``the most effective treatment for localized lung cancer is surgical removal.
``There will be good days and bad, which means that some days I may be cranky and some days really cranky!''
Schneider insisted that ABC executives are focused on Jennings' recovery.
He also anchored the New Year's Eve broadcast at the turn of the millennium that won a Peabody Award.
Jennings, who had not been feeling well for months, got the diagnosis Monday afternoon and told his staff that night.
"His manner of news delivery stood in contrast to but not in opposition of the gentle Midwestern aesthetic expressed by Tom Brokaw and the don't-mess-with-Texas eccentricity of Dan Rather."
Last week, Jennings' ABC colleague Ted Koppel announced he will leave "Nightline" this December.
NBC eased the transition from Tom Brokaw to Brian Williams in December by announcing the move two years ahead of time and giving viewers ample opportunities to watch Williams as a substitute anchor.
Gibson is in Rome for coverage of the pope's funeral, an assignment that Jennings, a former Rome and London correspondent for ABC News, normally would have taken.
The health of Jennings, a former smoker, surfaced as an issue late last year, when he was unable to travel abroad for coverage of the devastating tsunami in southern and Southeast Asia.
(For the week that ended April 1, ABC's newscast averaged almost 9.5 million viewers, compared with 10 million for NBC.)
In a note to his staff, Jennings wrote, ``Almost 10 million Americans are living with cancer.
In a note, Specter told the anchorman, ``the only way to get through chemo is to work your way through it.''
"Everybody is rallying around Peter, and we are here to help him get through this and beat this."
``Good night and good luck,'' said Edward R. Murrow.
"Obviously this is a very emotional day at ABC News," said a spokesman, Jeffrey Schneider.
In a videotaped message, he disclosed the diagnosis in a raspy voice, saying, ``Yes, I was a smoker until about 20 years ago, and I was weak and smoked over 9/11.
Jennings called the diagnosis ``quite a surprise'' and expressed gratitude for his colleagues.
Such was Jennings' longevity that he was in Germany when the Berlin Wall went up and when it came down.
He added: ``There will be good days and bad, which means that some days I may be cranky and some days really cranky!''
Jennings wrote of his coming treatment: "There will be good days and bad, which means that some days I may be cranky and some days really cranky!
On March 31, less than a week before Jennings disclosed his cancer, Westin announced that Ted Koppel would be leaving "Nightline" and the network in December.
``Peter has always been healthy as a horse and shows up for everything,'' said an ABC staffer who requested anonymity because network employees have been asked not to comment.
Even more significant, it would mark the end of a special kind of personality-driven news experience -- the last unique legacy (reruns not included) of the classic age of broadcast television.
Lung cancer is the leading cancer killer in the United States, and roughly four out of five people diagnosed with the disease die within five years, said Dr. Cliff Connery, chief of thoracic surgery at St. Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital in Manhattan.
Schneider said the diagnosis has not caused the network to focus more intently on the Jennings succession.
NBC completed a lengthy and smoothly choreographed transition in December when Brian Williams succeeded Brokaw in the anchor chair.
While the prognosis depends on the type of lung cancer, the overall cure rate is just 16 percent.
It feels good to have such a family right now.''
CBS had no replacement ready when Rather, under pressure from his botching of the story about President Bush's military service, stepped down last month, although Bob Schieffer, 68, has won praise as interim anchor for his more conversational style.
An Ohio mother said she and her children say, ``Good night, Peter'' every night after the newscast.
Lung cancer is usually difficult to treat.
At CBS, Rather's announcement last November that he would step down, which followed a furor over the flawed "60 Minutes Wednesday" report on President Bush's military record, left that network scrambling for a successor.
By allowing his feelings to be expressed on air, Jennings gave viewers an unusually personal glimpse of what it is like to have the disease as well as offering what may be solace to cancer patients, support group leaders said.
The 66-year-old anchor was too ill to work Saturday during the network's special report on Pope John Paul II's death.
At the time, ABC said Jennings had a severe upper respiratory infection, and the network sent Diane Sawyer.
This was always a man who had a more graceful humor and air of sophistication, which came from his days as a foreign correspondent when he looked like something from a 1940s movie, handsome and dashing.''
Still, ``chemotherapy can absolutely prolong life,'' said Edelman, who teaches at the State University of New York at Stony Brook.
There are effective ways to treat lung cancer, but its mortality rate is so high because so many patients aren't diagnosed until their disease is in an advanced stage, Connery said.
He hasn't been feeling well the past few months, and didn't travel under doctor's orders after December's tsunami because of what was described then as an upper respiratory infection.
This is either because the cancer is at too advanced a stage or because it is a form called small-cell cancer -- which occurs in about a quarter of such cases -- and has already spread to other parts of the body, he said.
A former smoker who quit 20 years ago, Jennings resumed smoking briefly after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks.
He was in regular e-mail contact with Westin; Jonathan Banner, the program's executive producer; and others, going so far as to comment on scripts for upcoming shows.
He was the courtliest of the Big Three anchors, the most frequently married -- four times -- and the least self-promotional.
With estimated annual advertising revenue of more than $100 million, "World News Tonight" is big business for ABC.
``Network news is in a big pickle,'' he said.
But, the staffer added, ``this is a man who will have no time and no patience for pity.''
``It signals the transition that ABC inevitably is going to have to make,'' said Charles Bierbauer, a former CNN and ABC correspondent who serves as dean of the University of South Carolina's College of Mass Communications and Information Studies.
``Our old and trusted friend, you have looked out for all of us for so long, and comforted us in our time of need,'' wrote Peggi and Ron Barratt.
Jennings did not go to Rome to cover Pope John Paul II's death.
Some in the industry had been sniping at him for not going to Asia to cover the tsunami and not anchoring coverage of the pope's final hours Friday and Saturday or heading off to Rome.
I am sure I will learn from them how to cope with the facts of life that none of us anticipated."
I am sure I will learn from them how to cope with the facts of life that none of us anticipated.''
I am sure I will learn from them how to cope with the facts of life that none of us anticipated.''
I am sure I will learn from them how to cope with the facts of life that none of us anticipated."
"Almost 10 million Americans are living with cancer.
"Almost 10 million Americans are living with cancer.
``Almost 10 million Americans are living with cancer.
The woman stepped right in my face and said, `Me too.
"I think it sets the right example," Johnson said.
It may take your life, but you shouldn't let it control your life."
``And that's the way it is,'' asserted the decisive Walter Cronkite.
The man Mickelson picked was Walter Cronkite.
``Thousands of you have spoiled me rotten with your attention in the last couple of weeks,'' Jennings said in a statement that was read on air by Elizabeth Vargas.
In terms of the chemotherapy stopping him, most people do work through chemotherapy."
People think, `If he can go public with his employers about his cancer, maybe I can, too.'
Others likely to fill in include chief White House correspondent Terry Moran and network correspondent Bob Woodruff.
``Good Morning America'' co-host Diane Sawyer, as well as Gibson, would be part of any shortlist, but both seem happy with their current situations.
As an anchor, Murrow was a bit of a bust, but another candidate was waiting in the wings.
He returned to the desk in 1978 when third-place ABC tried a multi-anchor format, which was abandoned in 1983 when Frank Reynolds died from cancer.
Vargas got the last-minute call Tuesday night.
Jennings added a similarly light note on Tuesday night's broadcast, smiling several times and noting that he was ``a little surprised at the kindness today from so many people.
Westin called the news "a tough assignment," while Jennings, 66, said it was "quite a surprise."
Dr. Scott Swanson, a thoracic surgeon at New York's Mount Sinai Medical Center who specializes in lung cancer, said of Jennings: "He seems pretty healthy now.
ABC executives refused to provide medical details of the type or state of Jennings's cancer.
One morning last week, he even participated via conference call in the program's 9 a.m. editorial meeting, his voice hoarse but strong.
While making Jennings's condition public, the network did not provide details about the diagnosis or prognosis.
And he stayed back from Asia after the disastrous tsunami in December.
He did tape a brief commentary to close the newscast, speaking in a hoarse and strained voice.
Sixty percent of lung cancer patients die within a year of diagnosis, and nearly 75 percent die within two years.
They have been losing audience share for two decades but still reach 30 million people with their evening newscasts.
A Canadian who proudly became a U.S. citizen in 2003, the urbane Jennings dominated the ratings from the late 1980s to the mid-'90s, when Brokaw surpassed him.
Nine in 10 lung cancer cases are related to smoking, and a diminishing risk continues even after someone quits.
``The simple fact is that the generation is changing.''
``There is research that shows when you remove pivotal people on television from a person's daily life, they feel like they've had a death in the family,'' he said.
``I think it's a mistake for anybody to think anchors are no longer as important as they once were, because when there's a crisis in America, or affecting America, people turn to someone they trust,'' said Dean, who worked at CBS and ABC.
``Hundreds of you have been like family.
Obviously this is an emotional day here.
Murrow, of course, was the prototype for this new breed of broadcast journalist.
Alex Jones, director of Harvard's Shorenstein media center, said that when he interviewed Jennings two decades ago, ``he was embarrassed that he had not finished high school and worked all the harder to be a superb journalist.
``He's very strong and he's a fighter.
``I was thinking back to when Betty Ford first went public with her breast cancer, and what a difference that made,'' Brace said.
But if ABC News makes any long-term strategic or personnel moves, including grooming a successor for the anchor chair, it could appear to be preparing for a future without Jennings, who, at 66, maybe the news network's biggest star.
Jennings' announcement provoked sadness and dismay among his colleagues at ABC, where the anchor plays a central role in leading the news division.
``Peter's been given a tough assignment,'' Westin added.
"Quite frankly, I think some of my colleagues might be surprised at how he's getting involved in scripts."
During the TV coverage of the 1952 presidential conventions, CBS News President Sig Mickelson coined the term ``anchorman'' for his primary on-air reporter.
The National Cancer Institute says that we are survivors from the moment of diagnosis.
He said: "The National Cancer Institute says that we are survivors from the moment of diagnosis.
Norman Edelman, chief medical officer of the American Lung Association, said a decision by patients not to seek surgery for lung cancer ``suggests they believe it's already spread to a point where surgery does not offer a cure.''
NBC planned best for the inevitable succession, anointing Brian Williams, 45, who has held onto the ratings lead, 21/2 years before he took over in December.
"Peter is an old friend," Brokaw said Tuesday.
He's been such a big part of our lives.''
``For Peter not to be there for the pope truly did leave everyone saying there must be something terribly wrong.''
By the 1990s, from the Gulf War through O.J.-TV to the massacre at Columbine High School, a multiplicity of news options and a dizzying cast of faces were available to bear the bad tidings.
But Robert Zelnick, chairman of Boston University's Department of Journalism and a former ABC News correspondent, said it would be hard to find an adequate replacement.
(From their high-water mark in the late 1960s, ratings for the network newscasts have plummeted by 60 percent.)
He did go to Iraq in January for the elections.
A middle-aged couple was going into the building and as they passed me, I heard my name and turned.
A woman in my building who is a cancer survivor showed up at my front door so that we could see that bald really is beautiful.
``This does give people a way to say, `Me too.'
"Your initial reaction is you wish Peter Jennings well," said J. Max Robins, editor in chief at Broadcasting & Cable magazine.
``Please take the time to now look out for yourself.''
He tells me, as have many others, that when it gets really bad, it will get better.
I'm counting on him getting through this very difficult passage."
A younger generation of anchors mostly lacks that depth of experience -- Jennings as a Middle East-based correspondent for seven years, Rather as a White House correspondent and ``60 Minutes'' contributor, Brokaw as a White House reporter and ``Today'' host.
That kind of testimony from a public figure like Jennings can make a ``huge difference'' in peoples' lives, Brace said last night after hearing Jennings' remarks on the newscast.
Jennings was the first to establish a television bureau in the Middle East and one of three western journalists to witness Saddam Hussein's first appearance in an Iraqi court last year.
"Lung cancer in general is aggressive," Swanson added.
``What we see in Peter Jennings is a role model,'' said Suzanne Brace, executive director of HopeWell Cancer Support in Lutherville, Md.
"I'm heartbroken, but he's also a tough guy.
ABC's Web site was flooded with emotional testimonials from people about his effect on their lives, many referring to him as a member of the family.
The anchor's roots reach back to the birth of modern broadcast journalism in 1938, when CBS Radio launched its ``World News Roundup'' just in time to track Hitler marauding across Europe.
If Westin continues to simply patch together a lineup of substitute anchors while waiting for Jennings to recover his health, the network could squander the momentum it has already generated.
Jennings went on to describe notes and messages he had received from Sen. Arlen Specter, R-Pa., and Hamilton Jordan, former chief of staff in the administration of President Carter.
Cronkite had to wait until 1962 before taking the reins of ``The CBS Evening News'' away from Douglas Edwards, but 1963 was his breakout year.
Stuart Fischoff, a professor emeritus of media psychology at California State University, Los Angeles, said he is not surprised by the emotional responses to Jennings' absence from the newscast last week.
``I've been walking around for days feeling a lump of sadness.
The son of a Canadian broadcaster, Jennings got dual U.S. citizenship after the 2001 terrorist attacks.
Jennings' diagnosis forces ABC executives to begin contemplating the question of succession, too -- a matter most had assumed would be at least several years off.
Then, over a vertiginous four days that November, the Kennedy assassination sent millions of Americans to the anchor to calm their nerves and soothe their souls.
He later quit again, a colleague said.
The announcement Tuesday seemed to stun the network.
By the end of the week, more than 3,400 e-mails offering him prayers and good wishes had filled the network's online message board -- many of them expressing an intensely personal sense of grief.
That September, first CBS and then NBC expanded their news broadcasts from 15 minutes to 30.
If it's already spread, then surgery is not an option.''
Everyone's first, second and third thoughts are for Peter's speedy recovery.''
The audience for the three major evening newscasts has shrunk considerably amid growing competition, yet they still combine to attract upward of 26 million people each weeknight.
CBS Chairman and Chief Executive Leslie Moonves has called the traditional ``voice of God'' anchor an antiquated concept and suggested that his network may roll out a more irreverent, multi-anchor format.
"As the struggle continues to win viewers, people at very high levels at the networks are going to have to make some tough decisions."
Westin faces a far bigger dilemma in the long run.
Jennings, Rather and Brokaw once dominated the media landscape, to a degree unimaginable today, because beginning in the early 1980s they reached about half the television audience, unchallenged by cable news -- then in its infancy -- or talk radio or the Internet.
Jennings had been a heavy smoker until the mid- to late-1980s, colleagues said.
Over the years, American anchormen derived their authoritative profile less from anything they did than from the simple fact of prolonged exposure, repeated ceremonially for years, in a hegemonic media environment.
But transferring viewer affection to new anchors is not a simple matter, media experts said.
``Nights when they don't see him physically on the air, they know his steady hand is on the tiller.''
``Do I detect a knowing but sympathetic smile on many of your faces?
The declamatory style of the town-crier announcer (familiar as the so-called Voice of God in the Hollywood newsreels) soon gave way to a new reportorial model in which the journalist became a commentator as well, guiding the listener through strange doings and complex geopolitics.
``Life won't be the same till you're back in the living rooms of America every night,'' wrote a woman identified as Marilyn L.
``He's a tougher man than I am,'' Jennings said.
He often described himself as a terrible interview.
Some executives actually view the turnover as an opportunity to radically remake the broadcasts in hopes of appealing to a younger demographic.
A college student wrote that she never misses his broadcasts and that she used to watch it nightly with her father.
``Whenever someone like that goes public, it gives others permission to talk about their cancers.
As a coach for aspiring broadcasters, Castengera has told his students to watch Jennings' broadcasts, "because he has such a relaxed, personable style that makes him very easy to relate to," he says.
It also offers encouragement and courage.
Anchorman: The very word suggests security and gravitas.
``I won't soon forget an encounter as I was leaving the hospital.
``They can't afford to let whoever takes over the time to grow into the role.''
Jennings offered a further update on his treatment Friday in a letter posted on the abcnews.com Web site.
But whatever the reason, the news does slow you down a bit.
Jennings has won 14 national Emmys, several Alfred I. duPont-Columbia University awards, several Overseas Press Club awards and a George Foster Peabody award.
``We have these really intense, interpersonal connections with these stars.''
At the time, ABC insiders thought he was battling a lingering flu or a similar ailment.
Viewer after viewer cited Jennings' handling of coverage of the Sept. 11 attacks as a welcome balm during a horrific day.
ABC anticipated Brokaw's resignation by kicking off a promotional campaign for Jennings with the tag line: ``Trust is earned.''
In this sense, it is hard to lament the transfer of power from the great and powerful men in front of the curtain to every munchkin with a modem.
Jordan sent Jennings a book titled ``No Such Thing as a Bad Day.''
But TV news correspondent and anchor Morton Dean dismissed the idea that audiences no longer seek that kind of relationship.
Tellingly, the most traumatic day in U.S. broadcasting history -- 9/11 -- bequeathed no equivalent to Cronkite's JFK moment: The images of disaster are indelible, but no face, gesture or remark from a single newscaster stands out.
"There is a constant stream of big decisions coming down the road."
A Cincinnati viewer wrote that ``when the nation circles its wagons, you are the wagon master that provides us with a sense of calm.''
The dinnertime newscast -- once de rigueur from coast to coast -- became a missable feast for Americans who had been munching all day on cable and the Internet.
Vargas is viewed as a rising star within the network.
In Rather's absence, CBS executives have discussed experimenting with the time-honored "voice-of-God," single-anchor format.
By the time newer and faster technological rivals, including bloggers who often criticized them, came on the scene, the Big Three anchors were well-established figures from having chronicled so many national and global stories, from war to impeachment to terrorism.
"This will probably be a momentous year for network news," says Michael Castengera, a lecturer at the University of Georgia's Grady College of Journalism and an independent media consultant.
The anchor was always careful not to run too far ahead of his Nielsen demographic -- maybe a few feet ahead of the fashion curve, but never out on the cutting edge.
``Those days are over where you have that guy sitting behind the desk that everybody believes to the nth degree,'' he told reporters in January.
Born in Toronto, he became a U.S. citizen in 2003.