Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat would be buried at his headquarters in the West Bank town of Ramallah, well-informed Palestinian sources said Tuesday.
- Palestinian prime minister Ahmed Qorei says Arafat is in critical condition.
Senior Palestinian official Yasser Abed Rabbo denied on Tuesday reports saying that Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat has died in a French hospital.
An agreement on funeral arrangements to be made in the aftermath of Yasser Arafat's death was reached Tuesday by Israeli and Palestinian officials, a senior Palestinian official said on condition of anonymity.
Herewith a summary of events related to Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat's health situation.
Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat was not dead at 3:30 pm (1430 GMT), a French official said.
"Senior Palestinian and Israeli officials have reached an agreement in principle on the arrangements to be made after the death of president Arafat," the official told AFP.
Egypt might host a funeral service for Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat in the event of his death, Palestinian delegate to the Arab League (AL) Ahmed Sobeih told Xinhua late Tuesday.
The Palestinian leader's advisor Nabil Abu Rudeina says Arafat is "OK".
An official at the army medical service said that Arafat "is not dead."
No official announcement on the death of the Palestinian leader would be made until "an agreement is reached on his burial," the source added.
Earlier in the day, the Arabic-language news network said that Arafat had died at a French military hospital.
The 13 main Palestinian factions held an emergency meeting Tuesday to discuss arrangements to follow an official announcement that Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat has died, an Islamic Jihad leader said.
We want to hear from the doctors directly."
Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon said earlier that Arafat could be buried in Gaza and Israel has completed preparations for the burial.
Israel opposes burying Arafat in Jerusalem, although Arafat himself indicated preference for the city for his final resting place.
Tuesday witnessed a flurry of conflicting reports on Arafat's fate, with some claiming he was dead and others saying his vital organs were still functioning.
Palestinian officials refused to comment on the report, saying it was still too early to talk about the burial place as long as Arafat was still alive.
But Arafat's wife, Suha, who has fiercely protected her husband's privacy, lashed out in an emotional television interview with Al-Jazeera television early Monday, calling the planned visit by Palestinian officials a "conspiracy" against her husband.
As Arafat had struggled for life, there has been wild guess as to where he might be buried and where to hold the funeral service.
"Palestinian officials will make an announcement about the passing away of President Arafat Wednesday morning," the TV report said, quoting sources in France, where Arafat had been treated since Oct. 29.
The extraordinary turn of events is an indication of the confusing court politics surrounding Arafat, who is variously described as on his death bed or recovering.
On Sunday, Shaath, who was to go with the two men, said: "We've heard many conflicting reports, and it makes us worried.
"The meeting brings together the 13 members of the high committee for national and Islamic forces, including Hamas, Islamic Jihad, the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine and (Arafat's) Fatah party," he added.
He did not say what the diagnosis was, or whether the delegation had actually seen Arafat face to face.
"They are trying to bury Abu Ammar alive," she said, using Arafat's nom de guerre.
While Abbas and Qureia seem to be controlling the situation among Palestinians and are trying to reach internal agreement on a post-Arafat leadership, Mofaz said, "there is no guarantee they will be successful" in their efforts to get Palestinian militants to stop attacks against Israelis during the current crisis.
Asked if Arafat were dead, Barnier answered, "I wouldn't say that."
"I would say he is in a state that is very complicated, very serious and stable at the time we are speaking," Barnier said.
That the leading Palestinian politicians felt the need to find out the real facts for themselves is itself extraordinary.
His wife is controlling the meager release of information about his health, even to Arafat intimates in Paris.
Tayeb Abdel Rahim, a senior Arafat aide, announcing the postponement of the Paris visit, also said that the critical comments by Suha Arafat "don't represent our people."
The sources told the Dubai-based al-Arabiya TV that France reached a compromise with Israel to bury Arafat in Ramallah after his death.
Nov 2: Doctors issue a medical bulletin saying Arafat's illness is not leukemia but fail to disclose the exact nature of his illness.
- Israel says it will allow Arafat to seek treatement wherever he wishes.
- Palestinian television airs images of Arafat in pyjamas and surrounded by his doctors.
- Israel says it will not restrict Arafat's movements.
- At mid-day a team of Jordanian doctors, including Arafat's personal physician Ashraf al-Kurdi, arrive in Ramallah.
Barnier also announces that several Palestinian leaders, including acting Palestine Liberation Organisation leader Mahmud Abbas are expected in Paris the following day.
Oct 31: Sharon says he is opposed to Arafat, once dead, being buried in Jerusalem's Al-Aqsa mosque compound.
Oct 28: Qorei and Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon speak by telephone.
Nov 8: Arafat's wife Suha lashes out at the Palestinian leaders due to visit her husband, accusing them of trying to usurp power from him while he is still alive.
Oct 25: Israel allows Arafat to leave his Ramallah headquarters, where he has been under siege for nearly three years, to be treated at a local hospital.
The Palestinian leaders cancel their trip to Paris but then reschedule it and arrive in the French capital late in the day.
- French presidency announces in late afternoon that it has accepted a request by the Palestinian Authority for Arafat to be transferred to Paris for treatment.
Oct 24: Tunisian doctors say Arafat is suffering from a severe case of the flu.
Nov 7: French Foreign Minister Michel Barnier say Arafat is alive but in serious condition.
Nov 5: His spokeswoman in Paris says Arafat is 'between life and death' and in a reversible coma.
Nov 4: A French medical source says Arafat is "brain dead" and breathing thanks only to artificial life support systems.
Yasser Arafat is in a "very difficult and serious" situation, the Palestinian foreign minister said Tuesday after he and other officials met their critically ill leader's doctors.
Palestinian foreign minister Nabil Shaath denied a claim by a fellow cabinet minister Tuesday that Arafat has died in a French military hospital but said he was very ill.
"The first contacts should take place in the night with the aim of reaching an agreement on the organisation of the funeral for Yasser Arafat," the official said on condition of anonymity.
Top Palestinian officials abruptly postponed a trip to Paris on Monday to ascertain the real condition of ailing leader Yasser Arafat after critical comments by his wife, a spokesman said Monday.
Estripeau, the medical service's official spokesman, said earlier Tuesday that Arafat had slipped into a "deeper coma."
Nov 3: Arafat is transferred to the hospital's intensive care unit.
Asked after a visit to the hospital treating Arafat about reports that he was close to death, Nabil Shaath said: "Only God knows the answer to that."
Officials categorically deny reports that he is dead.
Oct 30: Palestinian officials deny reports that Arafat is suffering from leukemia or that he has lost his faculties.
Oct 27: Arafat has fainted, Israeli radio says, although one of the Palestinian leader's aides denies that.
Israeli and Palestinian officials will begin talks overnight to discuss funeral arrangements for Yasser Arafat, a senior Israeli official told AFP Tuesday.
However, a high-ranking Palestinian security official in Gaza, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said that he expects that Arafat's death would be announced within the coming few hours.
Israel is preparing for a possible escalation of violence in the West Bank and Gaza after the death of Arafat, the Israeli defense minister, Shaul Mofaz, told the Cabinet on Sunday, Israeli officials said.
Abed Rabbo told reporters in the West Bank city of Ramallah that the reports saying that Arafat who suffers from a deep coma earlier Tuesday had died "are totally untrue," adding that "Arafat is still alive."
Meanwhile, the Al-Arabiya TV channel reported Tuesday night that the Palestinian side will announce the death of 75-year-old veteran leader Yasser Arafat Wednesday morning.
He refused to give further details about the agreement, and in particular whether Israel had given the go-ahead for the Palestinian leader to eventually be buried in his battered Muqataa compound in the West Bank town of Ramallah.
Oct 23: A team of Tunisian doctors are allowed by Israel to travel to the West Bank town of Ramallah to examine Arafat.
- Arafat's condition deteriorated overnight and he is now in a deeper coma, the spokesman for the French army medical service says.
However in Ramallah a member of the Palestinian cabinet said that Arafat was dead, and that there was disagreement over when to make the announcement.
Oct 29: Arafat heads to the Jordanian capital Amman on board a helicopter and is then transferred to a French military jet that transports him to a military hospital on the outskirts of Paris.
- One of Arafat's doctors says he is suffering from a blood disease related to a viral infection, cancer or blood poisoning and must be hospitalized overseas.
Sunday night, the French foreign minister, Michel Barnier, told LCI television that Arafat was alive but that his circumstances were complicated.
Arafat's deputy in the Palestine Liberation Organization, Mahmoud Abbas, and Palestinian prime minister, Ahmed Qurei, were asked by the Fatah central committee on Sunday to speak directly to Arafat's doctors, Nabil Shaath, a Palestinian minister, said Sunday evening.
Nov 9: Arafat's spokeswoman Leila Shahid says the four leaders -- Abbas, prime minister Ahmed Qorei, foreign minister Nabil Shaath and parliament speaker Rawhi Fattuh Qorei -- will see the ailing Arafat.
On Saturday, prime minister Ahmed Qorei urged Palestinians not to allow themselves to be dragged into internecine warfare in the event of Arafat's death following a meeting with the factions and security services in Gaza City.
"His situation is very difficult and critical," he told reporters.
"We are in the process of discussing the steps to be taken when the death of president Arafat is officially announced," said Khaled al-Batch.
Arafat's condition was described as unchanged by a spokesman of the French military hospital in Paris where Arafat is variously said to be in an irreversible coma, a reversible one or no coma at all.
Egypt is reportedly to have offered to hold a funeral service for Arafat, partly to spare Arab leaders from Israeli security measures they have to go through if they go to the Palestinian territories to pay their last respect to the Palestinian leader.
"The statement made public by General Christian Estripeau is still valid at 3:30 pm," he said.
Two senior Palestinian officals Nasser el-Qidwa and Leila Shahid also denied that Arafat was dead.