Her retirement, which sets up a long-awaited political battle for a successor and gives President George W. Bush his first chance to select a justice for the high court, was confirmed by a Supreme Court official who requested anonymity.
Her decision, announced Friday, handed President George W. Bush his first chance to reshape the ideological balance of the court, which has immense influence over the lives of Americans, interprets the constitution and acts as a court of last resort.
Conservatives, who turned out in record numbers to cast votes last November for the Republican president, see in the retirement of moderate Justice Sandra Day O'Connor a historic chance to reshape the nine-member high court, and fulfill a fervent wish to overturn the watershed Roe v. Wade Supreme Court case which guaranteed women the right to an abortion.
Sandra Day O'Connor, the first woman appointed to the US Supreme Court and a frequent swing vote, announced her retirement Friday, setting up a fierce political showdown for her seat.
Sandra Day O'Connor, the first woman appointed to the US Supreme Court and a frequent swing vote, has announced her retirement, a court source said Friday.
O'Connor, named to the court in 1981 by President Ronald Reagan, was more conservative in her early years but gradually sided more often with the court's liberals.
Sandra Day O'Connor, the first woman ever appointed to the US Supreme Court, said Friday that she is retiring, giving US president George W. Bush his first opportunity to appoint a justice.
In a statement confirming O'Connor's resignation, Bush said he will pick her successor in a timely manner so her vacancy can be filled by the time the court resumes work in October.
On Sunday, a seminar will focus on who will fill the Supreme Court seat that will be vacated by Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, who announced her retirement July 1.
The move handed President George W. Bush his first chance to reshape the ideological balance of the court, which has immense influence over the lives of Americans, interprets the constitution and acts as a court of last resort.
The perennial battle over abortion rights in the United States is galvanizing conservative and liberal activists, who are hoping to influence President George W. Bush's choice to fill a newly-vacated US Supreme Court seat.
President George W. Bush on Friday said he would nominate a new Supreme Court Justice in a timely manner, and called for a dignified confirmation battle, as rival political camps geared up for battle.
US Republicans and Democrats geared up Saturday for a major political battle over a successor to Supreme Court Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, who has announced her retirement.
Republicans and Democrats are geared up for a major political fight over a successor to Supreme Court Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, who announced her retirement last Friday.
In her first few years as a justice, O'Connor was known as the "Arizona Twin" because she voted so often with Chief Justice William Rehnquist, one of the court's most conservative members.
Her resignation, which will result in the first opening on the US Supreme Court in 11 years, will allow Bush to make his first appointment to the nine-member court which makes many vital decisions concerning US society.
"The nation deserves and I will select a Supreme Court justice that Americans can be proud of," Bush said.
"The nation deserves and I will select a Supreme Court justice that Americans can be proud of," Bush said.
"The nation deserves and I will select a Supreme Court Justice that Americans can be proud of," Bush said.
Her retirement gives Bush the chance to shape the ideological balance of the court, a fact that could spark a prolonged confirmation battle in the US Senate for a successor, touching on lightning bolt questions such as abortion and the separation of church and state.
"The nation also deserves a dignified process of confirmation in the United States Senate, characterised by fair treatment, a fair hearing and a fair vote," Bush said in a statement delivered in the White House Rose Garden.
"The nation also deserves a dignified process of confirmation in the United States Senate, characterised by fair treatment, a fair hearing and a fair vote," Bush said in a statement delivered in the White House Rose Garden.
Liberals, meanwhile, have sternly warned Bush not to name an "extremist" to the court and have vowed to put up a fierce fight to safeguard the right to legal abortion.
As President Bush searches for someone to succeed Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, who announced her resignation Friday, the experiences with Warren and many other members of the Supreme Court provide reminders that justices often don't vote the way presidents expect.
"This is to inform you of my decision to retire from my position as an associate justice of the Supreme Court of the United States, effective upon the nomination and confirmation of my successor," she said in a letter to Bush.
The vacancy handed Bush his first chance to reshape the ideological balance of the nine-member high court, which has immense influence over the lives of Americans as it interprets the constitution.
"I will chose a nominee in a timely manner so the hearing and the vote can be compelted before the new Supreme Court term begins."
O'Connor's retirement opens the first vacancy on the Supreme Court in 11 years.
O'Connor's retirement opens the first vacancy on the Supreme Court in 11 years.
O'Connor, 75, who is considered a moderate conservative, was appointed to the court by president Ronald Reagan and took her seat in September 1981.
With a Supreme Court seat now open for the first time in more than a decade, groups on both sides of the bitter abortion divide have said they are planning to spend millions to lobby Congress and the White House, and to rally their supporters.
Bush said he would pick a new justice in a "timely manner" but the White House said there would be no announcement before he returns from next week's G8 summit in Scotland.
Bush said he would pick a new justice in a "timely manner" but the White House said there would be no announcement before he returns from next week's G8 summit in Scotland.
Justice David Souter, an appointee of the first President Bush in 1990, has angered conservative Republicans by often voting with the court's liberals.
US President George W. Bush on Wednesday chastised critics of Attorney General Alberto Gonzales as a potential candidate for the recently-vacated seat in the Supreme Court.
Bush made a statement in the White House Rose Garden, shortly after Justice Sandra Day O'Connor announced her retirement.
"The most important indicator is their track record - what have they said, what have they written.
Gray, the former White House counsel, said Republicans have learned lessons from the nomination of Souter.
Minutes after O'Connor's announcement, political leaders and lobby groups fired the first shots in a long brewing battle for the court's political soul.
Minutes after O'Connor's announcement, political leaders and lobby groups fired the first shots in a long brewing battle for the court's political soul.
"It has been a great privilege indeed to have served as a member of the Court for 24 terms," she wrote in a letter to Bush.
"It has been a great privilege indeed to have served as a member of the Court for 24 terms," she wrote in a letter to Bush.
Bush also paid tribute to O'Connor, the first woman to serve on the top US court.
O'Connor was appointed by president Ronald Reagan and took her seat in September 1981.
O'Connor was appointed by president Ronald Reagan and took her seat in September 1981.
He also promised to "be deliberate and thorough" in making the choice and will consult with the Senate which will confirm his nominee.
I will be deliberate and thorough in this process," Bush said.
"The nation also deserves a dignified process of confirmation in the United States Senate, characterised by fair treatment, a fair hearing and a fair vote.
"Abortion rights and womens rights are on the line."
Liberals warned Bush not to name an "extremist" who could undermine women's right to have an abortion, while Republicans have urged him to pick a strict conservative.
Warren turned out to be one of the most liberal justices in history, leading the court to landmark rulings on civil rights and the separation of church and state.
"Justice O'Connor was a mainstream conservative who was confirmed unanimously by the Senate," Kennedy said.
I don't like it at all," Bush told reporters gathered outside Danish Prime Minister Anders Fogh Rasmussen's country residence, just north of Copenhagen.
Cheh, the George Washington University law professor, said Bush and his aides have learned from history and will thoroughly research possible nominees to make sure they get an ideologue.
For other vacancies on the court, presidents have nominated former politicians like Warren and White who have little or no judicial experience.
Indeed, the Constitution does not even require high court justices to have a law degree.
She often sided with more radical conservatives on the court, as when she voted with the majority to stop recounts in Florida after the 2000 election, effectively handing the White House to Bush over Al Gore.
She often sided with more radical conservatives on the court, as when she voted with the majority to stop recounts in Florida after the 2000 election, effectively handing the White House to Bush over Al Gore.
The idea is that a little hands-on political experience, such as O'Connor had in the Arizona state legislature before becoming a state court judge, might help the nominee reach sensible judicial judgments the country can support.
But the longer she was on the court, "she became more sensitive to individual rights," Cheh said.
As rival groups geared up for what is likely to be a bitter nomination battle, Bush scheduled a news conference for 11:15 am (1515 GMT) in the White House Rose Garden, his spokesman Scott McClellan said.
"I think we're in for a pretty partisan battle," said Orrin Hatch, a conservative US senator and longserving member of the powerful Senate Judiciary committee that will vet US President George W. Bush's eventual Supreme Court nominee.
Likewise, the Family Research Council said on its website that it is "primed for the fight it will take to confirm a nominee," and vowed to mobilize 20,000 churches across the nation to lobby for a conservative justice.
Senator Edward Kennedy, who famously scuppered the confirmation of Ronald Reagan's Supreme Court nominee Robert Bork, called on Bush to appoint someone who could be embraced by all Americans.
"We very badly want to support a nominee committed to justice and fair play," said Julian Bond, chairman of the board of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People.
"Once they get on the court, people who are not ideological get swept up in the majesty of interpreting the Constitution's beautiful but vague promises of due process and equal protection," he said.
He said many presidents have been unhappy with their appointees.
Justices are not term limited, so presidents have a chance to mould the country for years after they leave the political scene, through their court choices.
Justices are not term limited, so presidents have a chance to mould the country for years after they leave the political scene, through their court choices.
But Blackmun increasingly sided with liberals and authored the 1973 opinion that is the flashpoint for many conservatives: the Roe vs. Wade decision on abortion rights.
Liberals warned Bush not to name an "extremist" while Republicans urged him to pick someone who would apply rather than interpret the constitution -- in other words a strict conservative.
Liberals warned Bush not to name an "extremist" while Republicans urged him to pick someone who would apply rather than interpret the constitution -- in other words a strict conservative.
That would give him an opportunity to name simultaneously both a judge and a non-judge, broadening the public appeal of his choices.
Chief Justice William Rehnquist, for example, was tapped by President Richard Nixon while an assistant attorney general.
The last justice appointed was the liberal Justice Stephen Breyer, who was named by president Bill Clinton and he took his seat in August 1994.
The last justice appointed was the liberal Justice Stephen Breyer, who was named by president Bill Clinton and he took his seat in August 1994.
WASHINGTON - President Dwight D. Eisenhower figured Earl Warren would make an ideal chief justice of the U.S. Supreme Court.
Eisenhower said he chose Warren the next year because of his deliberate style and his "middle-of-the-road" philosophy.
The gathering comes as the group works to overcome budget shortfalls and recover from allegations that its former president, Kweisi Mfume, played favorites among employees and mismanaged the national staff.
The president apparently welcomed the suggestion, although the names being circulated so far in public all wear black robes or did so in the past.
With a nod to their shared Texas heritage, Bush said: "for an old ranching girl, you turned out pretty good," according to McClellan.
This is not as shocking an idea as it seems at first blush.
Last month, the Baltimore-based nonprofit selected a new president, Bruce S. Gordon, who will start in the job Aug. 1.
That court handed down the landmark Brown vs. Board of Education ruling outlawing school segregation.
Despite the importance of the work, it can obviously get boring within those marble judicial halls.
During the president's politically correct consultation with the bipartisan Senate leadership this week, several senators urged that someone be considered who is not already on a lower federal bench, the customary source of previous appointments.
Their background meant "you had a broader experience," Specter observed.
For decades, a deep ideological rift over a woman's right to end an unwanted pregnancy has cleaved this country into two powerful, and equally-impassioned camps.
Bush's visit, his first to Denmark but his fifth meeting with Rasmussen since 2002, was seen by commentators as a symbolic gesture thanking Denmark for supporting the war in Iraq, where it has deployed more than 500 troops near the southern city of Basra.
I take this responsibility seriously.
So whose name might join the gossip circus now?
Alas, he is 71 years old, a tad ancient for a lifetime seat the president sees as an important part of his historical legacy.
There are other sitting senators as well who are not extremists and could serve honorably with dignity.
Sen. Ben Nelson, D-Neb., a moderate and a leader of the bi-partisan "gang of 14" that derailed a GOP Senate move to kill the right to filibuster judicial nominations, might be an acceptable bipartisan compromise.
Bush is also getting advice from an unusual quarter, the current Supreme Court justices.
(Marianne Means can be reached at the e-mail address means@hearstdc.com)
"We're considering all kinds of people -- judges, non-judges."
Researchers who looked into his record found so little that the press dubbed him "the stealth justice."
"When you surround yourself by other rich lawyers and liberal policymakers, you tend to grow out of touch with Joe Six Pack and Brenda Babysitter out there in the real world," Feeney said.
With a nod to their shared Texas heritage, Bush said: "for an old ranching girl, you turned out pretty good," according to McClellan.
And the left-leaning "Ms." magazine this month warned its readers that "rolling back reproductive rights is only the first act in a nightmare scenario that could come to pass if right-wing judges take over the federal courts and the nations highest court."
"That tends to draw them to the left."
That's just absolutely a fact a life."
Some justices defy expectations because the presidents who chose them didn't do enough homework.
Liberal groups were equally motivated: The pro-choice Feminist Majority sounded the alarm within hours of O'Connor announcing her retirement.
Other justices have changed after they got on the court.
But he surprised many people by often voting conservatively on the court.
I'll pick people who... will strictly interpret the Constitution and not use the bench to legislate from," he said.
That was the case with Souter, a state judge in New Hampshire who served briefly as a federal appeals judge before his nomination to the Supreme Court.
Bush's chance to remake the court is all the more important because key cases on abortion, assisted suicide and gay rights are looming when justices return from their summer break in October.
Bush's chance to remake the court is all the more important because key cases on abortion, assisted suicide and gay rights are looming when justices return from their summer break in October.
No official announcement has been made.
"(A)s I said during both of my campaigns, there will be no litmus test.
Experts said the appointment is set to trigger fierce political battle between the Republicans and Democrats.
Democratic activists fear that Bush will replace O'Connor, who cast the key votes in two key abortion rights test cases in 2000, with a 'pro-life' justice.
Democratic activists fear that Bush will replace O'Connor, who cast the key votes in two key abortion rights test cases in 2000, with a 'pro-life' justice.
"We've been doing this ever since we knew the chief justice (William Rehnquist) had thyroid cancer."
The worst has happened with the resignation of Sandra Day OConnor," the group said on its website.
"I don't like it when a friend gets criticized.
The answer is: You bet," Bush told reporters.
"The Republicans," she said, "have made this a high art."
Many conservative groups are urging President Bush to nominate someone like Thomas and Scalia to be O'Connor's successor.
"He was consistent that he thought the court should stay out of the way of the legislature," Cheh said.
NAACP members are being urged to contact the White House and their senators to influence selection of the nominee, said Hilary Shelton, head of the NAACP's Washington, D.C., branch.
I'm loyal to my friends," the US leader said of Gonzales during a brief stop in Denmark on Wednesday before attending the G8 summit in Scotland.
"She has been a discerning and conscientious judge and a public servant of complete integrity."
"I will leave it with enormous respect for the integrity of the Court and its role under our constitutional structure," wrote O'Connor, who was born in Texas and practiced law in the southwestern state of Arizona.
"I will leave it with enormous respect for the integrity of the Court and its role under our constitutional structure," wrote O'Connor, who was born in Texas and practiced law in the southwestern state of Arizona.
The new Supreme Court justice must be a strong advocate for civil rights, and NAACP members are pressuring lawmakers to make that a priority in the selection process, NAACP officials said at the group's annual convention Saturday.
Cancer-stricken Chief Justice William Rehnquist had been seen as the most likely justice to retire, but has so far made no announcement on his future.
Cancer-stricken Chief Justice William Rehnquist had been seen as the most likely justice to retire, but has so far made no announcement on his future.
The president was set to pore over profiles of potential Supreme Court picks during the long flight to Europe, his spokesman Scott McClellan said.
The president was set to pore over profiles of potential Supreme Court picks during the long flight to Europe, his spokesman Scott McClellan said.
Another liberal group, MoveOn.org said on its website that it aimed to deliver 300,000 petition signatures by Tuesday to the US Senate, asking lawmakers to help preserve the right to end a pregnancy.
In his early years, he frequently voted with conservative Chief Justice Warren Burger.
Republican Senate Majority Leader Bill Frist said: "America needs judges who are fair, independent, unbiased and committed to equal justice under the law."
Republican Senate Majority Leader Bill Frist said: "America needs judges who are fair, independent, unbiased and committed to equal justice under the law."
They are the darlings of the right and the foes of the left because they rarely stray from conservative orthodoxy.
How can they be sure they won't get another Warren - or another White?
I think if you have a candidate who has a known record, that is the best," Gray said.
But a lot of people would figuratively kill to get there anyway.
"We thought Justice Souter would vote differently than he turned out to vote," said Boyden Gray, White House counsel under former President Bush.
"Would I be willing to consider people who had never been a judge?
Political observers predicted Armaggedon once the fight to replace O'Connor is joined in earnest, with dozens of political groups expected to play a role.
"He said he's going to pick a strong conservative, and I think that's going to cause a battle no matter what," Hatch told ABC television Tuesday.
There was a similar transformation for Blackmun, an appointee of President Nixon in 1970.
"Let there be no mistake about it: Sandra Day OConnor was the fifth vote that was saving Roe vs. Wade," the group said in a dire warning to its supporters.
Bond's comments came on the opening day of the group's 96th annual convention, where more than 8,000 people are expected to discuss issues such as reparations for slavery, renewal of the voting rights act and ways of increasing membership.
"The message: Don't nominate an extremist who will undermine the rights of individuals and families as the President did in the Terri Schiavo case several months ago," MoveOn.org said in a statement, referring to the recent Florida right-to-die controversy.
Although the Brown decision temporarily caused widespread social turmoil and President Dwight D. Eisenhower later complained that his decision to nominate Warren was his biggest mistake, the unanimous ruling was gradually accepted as the law of the land.
The debate also is expect to further polarize an already-divided US Senate which will be called upon to confirm the president's pick.
"America is proud of Justice O'Connor's distinguished service and I am proud to know her," he said.
They look at the world differently."
Both sides are scouring the records of possible nominees to look for clues about how they might vote: judicial opinions, speeches and law review articles.
"Nobody knew what he stood for," said Paul Finkelman, a law professor at the University of Tulsa in Oklahoma.
Bush and O'Connor spoke in what aides said was an "emotional" phone call.
Bush and O'Connor spoke in what aides said was an "emotional" phone call.
But how can either side know what they're getting?
Legal analysts say they haven't morphed because they are strict ideologues who apply their principles to every decision.
"President Bush is faced with a decision that affects each and every American."
Ralph Neas, president of People for the America Way, said Bush's nominee "is probably going to be either a judge or an academic with a lengthy record that is faithful to the record of a Thomas or a Scalia."
Legal historians point out that of the 108 justices who have served on the Supreme Court, only 48 were actually drawn from the ranks of sitting judges.
The experience has prompted a refrain by many conservatives: "No more Souters."
Justice Byron White, an appointee of President John Kennedy in 1962, was expected to be a liberal, but often voted conservatively on personal liberty and law-and-order cases.
The US leader also reiterated that there would be "no litmus test" on controversial issues like abortion or gay marriage for nominees to the Supreme Court position.
Rehnquist's bout with thyroid cancer and sudden, short hospital stay this week for a fever have created a spike in speculation that Bush may have two vacancies to fill before the new court term begins in October.
... We hope to support someone who brings the country together rather than drives the country apart."
"I feel no pressure, except the pressure to put somebody on the bench who will bring dignity to the office, somebody who's got the intellect necessary to do the job, somebody of great integrity and somebody who will faithfully interpret the Constitution," Bush said.
It was difficult to assess Souter because he had been a federal judge for less than a year.
The NAACP's health committee is investigating how well hospitals address racial gaps _ particularly by having black physicians on staff _ and it will grade hospitals in a report card to be released next year, said Rupert Richardson, an NAACP board member from Louisiana and chairwoman of the group's national health committee.
He indicated he was already doing so.
First Lady Laura Bush is publicly plumping for a woman to replace O'Connor, but gender is not foremost in the minds of most legal interest groups.
"We don't want to have to oppose a nominee who is opposed to those things.
O'Connor, a snowy haired 75-year-old judge and former prosecutor, told Bush her retirement would become effective upon the confirmation of a successor.
O'Connor, a snowy haired 75-year-old judge and former prosecutor told Bush her retirement would become effective upon the confirmation of a successor.
It leaves Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg as the sole woman on the nine justice Supreme Court bench.
It leaves Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg as the sole woman on the nine justice Supreme Court bench.
Blackmun was a longtime Republican, so Nixon and his aides figured he would be a dependable conservative on the court.
But the most frequently mentioned names include Attorney General Alberto Gonzales as well as federal appeals court judges Michael Luttig, Harvie Wilkinson, John Roberts and former solicitor general Theodore Olson.
The court under Chief Justice Earl Warren is an example of judicial diversity that has stood the test of time.
Although an ultraconservative, he is fair-minded and could be easily confirmed.
Lazarus, the former Blackmun clerk, said he agrees there is a seduction, but said it affects nominees who don't come to the job with a strict ideology.
White House aides "really didn't know much about him," said Eddie Lazarus, a former clerk for Justice Harry Blackmun and author of Closed Chambers, an inside look at the court.
Mary Cheh, a law professor at George Washington University, said White was a New Deal Democrat who was in favor of "big government and federal programs."
Finkelman, the University of Tulsa professor, said getting a lifetime appointment to the nation's highest court leaves people free to make their own judgments without being bound by a rigid ideology.
"You can never predict or control (how they'll vote).
A Supreme Court spokeswoman said O'Connor needs to spend time with her husband who suffered from Alzheimer's disease.
Speculation has circled around Gonzales, who has been criticized by both liberals and conservatives, especially for his role in the controversial US policy towards terrorist suspects in captivity.
The court's most consistent conservatives are Justices Antonin Scalia and Clarence Thomas.
Liberal groups such as People for the American Way are saying just the opposite, urging Bush to pick a moderate.
"We've educated our members on this," Shelton said.
The others have been practicing lawyers, attorneys general, Cabinet officers, senators, members of the House, governors, solicitors general and law professors.
Cheh says O'Connor's opinions in the early days were "very mechanical" and the only issue she was passionate about was states' rights.
He blames it on the culture of Washington.
O'Connor, 75, did not explain why she was resigning.
Just when we thought there was no new speculation about President Bush's pending replacement of Sandra Day O'Connor on the Supreme Court, along comes a surprise.
Bush says he will consider picking a female, but he seems more interested in naming a Hispanic male -- perhaps Attorney General Alberto Gonzales.
U.S. Rep. Tom Feeney, R-Oviedo, said it's more common for Republican appointees to morph into liberals than for Democratic nominees to become conservative.
Senator Edward Kennedy called on Bush to appoint someone who could be embraced by all Americans.
Sen. Orrin Hatch, R-Utah, former chairman of the Judiciary Committee, has openly lusted for a court seat.
Warren, the Republican governor of California, had been a loyal supporter of Eisenhower in the 1952 election.
Sen. Arlen Specter, R-Pa., chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, noted that career lawyers spend too much time with "footnotes and semicolons" and have "very little contact with people."
"African Americans have the worst health outcomes of all groups," said Evelyn Lewis, a physician with Pfizer Inc., a pharmaceutical company, who spoke on a panel Saturday.
The presidents assumed the nominees would follow their party's ideology, but it turned out the nominees had different ideas.
"President Bush is faced with a decision that affects each and every American," warned the Massachusetts Democrat.
"The landscape is littered with crushed expectations," Gray said.
This adds a new dimension to the partisan argument about whether any new justice should reveal his or her ideological leanings or be judged only on that vague category, "character."
"Their vantage point is altered," he said.
Warren was a former governor and unsuccessful vice presidential candidate and the court included three former U.S. senators.
A non-judge would have a different sort of record than a legal scholar, reflecting political choices made in real life with real consequences, instead of writings full of abstract philosophical theory.
It merely says that judges, "both of the supreme and inferior courts, shall hold their offices during good behavior."
That would also open up a Democratic seat in a red state that Republicans might recapture.
Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid, D-Nev., said that at a recent luncheon, some of the justices said they would prefer "somebody new on the court" rather than more appellate judges who "sit in their offices and read briefs."
"(A)ll of a sudden this fellow, who is a good public servant and a really fine person, is under fire...
Sen. Patrick Leahy, D-Vt., added that he approved of going "outside the judicial monastery."
NAACP officials also announced that Howard Dean, chair of the Democratic National Committee, and Ken Mehlman, chair of the Republican National Committee, will participate in a discussion on political issues on Thursday.
It is also fighting an investigation by the Internal Revenue Service, which claims that NAACP officials' strong criticisms of the Bush administration violated the group's nonprofit status.
Bush said in a newspaper interview published Tuesday that he expected to have a new justice on the bench by October, and already had identified "a good-sized" number of prospects.
Even before O'Connor announced her departure, the conservative Progress for America group last month launched a 700,000-dollar fundraising effort, hoping to beat back "liberal attack groups ... hungry to smear almost any potential candidate for the Supreme Court who doesn't meet their left-wing, extemist litmus test."
"Having gotten to the pinnacle, the top of the highest mountain, they suddenly discover there is no place to strive for.
The liberal political action committee MoveOn.org swiftly rolled out a television advertising campaign.
Eisenhower later said appointing Warren was "the biggest damn fool mistake I ever made."
"This is a problem everywhere," Richardson said.
The US president called on partisan groups to tone down the heated rhetoric, insisting in an interview USA Today that he is immune to the high-intensity lobbying.
"Under the Constitution, I am responsible for nominating a sucessor for Justice O'Connor.
The convention also will highlight the persistent health disparities between blacks and other groups, with panel discussions, free health screenings and fitness sessions planned each day.